WYRMREST
His vague shadow passed over the immense structure below as he circled to land. Even though he had been here before, the scope and age of the stone temple and its surroundings still struck him hard. The temple rose several levels high, with each level built for a race obviously towering over humans and orcs. The rows of grooved columns that lined the outside from the circular base to the rounded top stood like an army of sentinels surveying every desolate direction of the chilling Dragon Wastes. Long fangs of ice draped the ancient edifice, and vicious cracks ran through many of the columns and curved archways, but despite the ravages of time and several fierce conflicts that had engulfed it, Wyrmrest stood defiant, eternal. It was, to him, a welcome contrast to the horrific and seemingly endless transformations plaguing the world of Azeroth. The others would already be here. He peered at the distant shrines to each of the great dragonflights-bronze, emerald, azure, ruby, and obsidian- surrounding Wyrmrest. They were shrines without purpose now, the dragonflights in disarray or decimated. Even Wyrmrest, though it might stand ten millennia more, risked being nothing but a relic of a time and hope long past. The great blue dragon sighed and began his descent. As he did, his gaze briefly shifted far beyond the temple and the shrines to the north, where unsettling mounds dotted the icy landscape. He quickly looked away. Each mound was the frost-encrusted corpse of a dragon; some of the mounds dated thousands upon thousands of years back. The Dragon Wastes were the graveyard of hundreds of his kind, whatever their color. It was a grim reminder that even the mightiest of creatures were not invulnerable. The winged leviathan focused again on his destination. Wyrmrest seemed to swell before his eyes. By the time he neared one of the entrances at the base, the dragon was dwarfed by the temple. He alighted, and then, with one last glance around, stepped inside.
The interior did nothing to lessen the sense of enormity, the first chamber rising more than three times the dragon's height. Torches that still stayed lit despite the millennia gave some weak illumination. Ancient carvings loomed over him, many of them of indistinct figures with some resemblance to humans or elves, and yet were clearly not. Whether these were meant to represent the titans, the godlike beings who had brought order to the chaos and reshaped Azeroth to its current form, or had been carved with some other intent, the dragon did not know. This place had been built long before his time, indeed, long before the time of dragons in general. No one knew the reason for its construction, but long ago it had become the meeting place for the greatest of his kind, the Aspects-guardians of not only all dragons, but all Azeroth. Here, over the millennia, the five champions had assembled to coordinate the actions of the dragonflights. Here, during the Nexus War-in which the Aspect of Magic had led the blue dragonflight in an attempt to purge Azeroth of all mortal spellcasters who did not bow to his utter control-the leaders of the three other dragonflights had created the Wyrmrest Accord, an annual gathering in which they discussed what courses of action to take in regard to the oft-precarious future of the world. Here, after the War of the Ancients-when demons had invaded Azeroth and ancient Kalimdor had been sundered-four of them, Malygos at that time still very much included, had come to determine their next step to counter the treachery of one of their own. The last had become one of their predominant tasks, but even that long struggle paled against what had actually been their primary goal since the beginning: nothing less than preventing the Hour of Twilight, when all life on Azeroth would become extinct. That extraordinary victory had at last been achieved . . . at the greatest of costs for the Aspects. Now, here, for the first time since this ancient edifice had been chosen as their meeting place, the four remaining former Aspects came not as the world's champions, but simply as themselves. The dragon descended into a gorge carved into the ice, arriving at the lowest, half-buried portion of the temple. He listened, but heard no voices rising from within. It was possible that he had arrived before the others after all. He considered departing the temple and finding a nearby place to wait until one of the others turned up-for even after reassurance from the others, he still felt
that as the youngest it was not his place to be first among them in any manner -but finally proceeded. But as the scaled behemoth entered the lower level, he finally heard one of the others. Nozdormu. Trust the bronze dragon to still be the timeliest of them, even now. . . . What the other male said, the blue dragon could not make out. However, the reply of the one with whom Nozdormu spoke came clear. "We shall wait until we are all here," a soft yet commanding female voice answered. "Kalecgos deserves as much respect in that regard as any of us." Hearing his name, the blue dragon surged forward. Not only was he not first, he had clearly kept the others waiting. "I am here!" the blue roared. He entered a wide, circular chamber, the center of which contained a raised marble platform reachable by steps at the northern and southern points of the compass. Each corner of the platform was also topped by a huge column. Nozdormu turned his sharp gaze to the newcomer, the gargantuan bronze dragon flanked by two females equally imposing in size and majesty. The long, sleek emerald green dragon to the bronze's right stared unblinking at the blue with rainbow-colored orbs; Ysera, once She of the Dreaming, she for millennia of the ever-closed eyes, now never shut them even for an instant. She nodded to Kalecgos, but did not speak. At Nozdormu's other side, a majestic crimson female took a few steps toward the blue. In size and girth, she outdid any of the three, but there was a gentleness about her that belied her fearsome appearance. A long crest stretched down from her back to her tail, and the blue dragon knew that if she stretched her wings, their expanse would be wide enough to obscure her two companions. Three other dragons of slightly lesser size bowed their heads at his arrival. Each of the three stood positioned on the wide platform behind the former Aspect whose color they matched. These were among the most trusted, the most battle-tested of those who had served the champions. Kalecgos knew each well, from the swift and ready Chronormu-or Chromie, as she was referred to by those nearest her-to brave Merithra, daughter of Ysera. Of the three, though, he was probably most familiar with crimson Afrasastrasz, he who had
once been commander of Wyrmrest's defenses during the struggle against the Twilight's Hammer, the fanatical cult that had tried to hasten the end of Azeroth. The latter trio remained quiet and in the background. They were here to listen. Their presence reminded him once again that he, too, should have been accompanied. The only problem was, there had no longer been anyone left in the Nexus to do that. "There is no need to fear, Kalecgos," the lead red dragon calmly responded to his outburst, her voice melodic, calming. "We knew that you would be along shortly. Nozdormu merely expressed concern for you-did you not, Nozdormu?" "As you sssay," the bronze replied vaguely. His voice bespoke age and wisdom even though, like the others, he appeared in the fullness of life. "You are too kind." The blue bowed his long, crested head toward the elder dragons, then, to the crimson female, added, "Kalec, if you please, Alexstrasza." Nozdormu snorted, but Alexstrasza nodded. "Kalec. Forgive me for forgetting your preferred-what do the younger races call it?-nickname. But I thought you only liked its use when in a humanoid form." "Of late I've come to prefer it at all times." Kalec did not elaborate. "Perhaps we should all have nicknames," Ysera interjected without a hint of sarcasm. "After all, it is their world now. Indeed, I find I spend more time of late in a humanoid form than I do in this, my birth one. Perhaps that would be the best and quickest way to close our era. . . ." Her blunt words silenced the other three. After a moment clearly uncomfortable to all of them, Alexstrasza moved to take up a position at the very center of the wide dais. The other three followed suit, Nozdormu moving to the southern edge, Ysera to the east, and Kalec to the north. The west- Neltharion's place-had remained empty since his ancient betrayal. The red dragon surveyed the others; then, gazing up for a moment, she declared, "Let this gathering of the Accord begin!" Once, this pronouncement would have been accompanied by some magical spectacle, but such displays were a thing of the past. Fearsome these four behemoths might still be, but guardians of Azeroth they were not. They had
sacrificed their roles as Aspects in order to vanquish once and for all the monstrous black dragon Deathwing. Deathwing . . . he who had once been their comrade, Neltharion, and who, in his evil madness, had nearly succeeded in bringing about the Hour of Twilight. It had been a worthy sacrifice, but Kalec was well aware that in its wake, it had left all four forever altered. Kalec surreptitiously studied the elder three. He had come only lately into the role of Aspect of Magic, grudgingly accepting both it and rule over the blue dragonflight after the downfall of his predecessor and lord, Malygos. Malygos, also called the Spell-Weaver, had grown tired of what he considered the misuse of arcane magic by the lesser races, and had finally declared that such power was to be entrusted only to dragons and their allies. The Nexus War had swept across Azeroth and had ended only when, with the aid of Alexstrasza and a handful of her drakes, a band of heroes had entered the heart of his domain- the Nexus itself-and had regretfully put an end to both Malygos and his monstrous crusade. Seeking a new leader, the blue dragons had turned to the member of their flight who, through events, had proven to be the one whom they could trust most to lead: Kalec. The blue waited, but no one spoke. Even Alexstrasza seemed uninterested in continuing beyond calling the Accord to order. The Life-Binder appeared to be waiting for one of the others to take control, something that neither Ysera nor Nozdormu showed the slightest inclination of doing. But others did. Growing more visibly impatient than even Kalec felt, Chromie broke the silence. "If I may be permitted, there is a matter of concern. The timeways appear to be in flux! It may have to do with when the Dragon Soul was seized-" Nozdormu cut her off. "The timeways are no longer our concern! They are beyond my ability to control. From here on, the younger races and the younger races alone will deal with both them and whatever paths to the future they lead to." Chronormu obviously wanted to say more, but instead nodded. However, as she withdrew, Ysera's daughter dared speak up. "Perhaps I speak out of turn also, but there have been rumors that the Nightmare stirs in the Rift of Aln. It may be seeking a new puppet, another Nightmare Lord that will help it again
reach from the Emerald Dream into the waking world. . . ." "We have discussed this," Ysera pointedly reprimanded the other green. The former Aspect's expression momentarily changed. "I think we did . . . yes! We did! The rift and the corruption still touching the Emerald Dream will be dealt with by the druids . . . yes, the druids! The night elf Naralex has already led an effort that has seen the Nightmare sealed off. The druids will guard against the Nightmare more ably than we can now." The speech was a far more focused, more concentrated one than those Kalec had heard from Ysera shortly after the green's loss of her Aspect role and its powers. Then, Ysera had seemed absentminded and unable to articulate her thoughts well. Since that time, however, her mind had clearly made strides in regaining much of what it had lost. Merithra looked deflated. "As you say, Mother." Once again, an uneasy silence reigned over the assembly. Afrasastrasz, wiser than the other two subordinates, looked disinclined to add his own voice. Kalec suddenly felt acutely aware of the lack of anyone at his own side. It was as if time had stopped. No one even moved. Finally, well aware that it was his youth in part that stirred his impatience beyond his ability to command, Kalec blurted, "I would speak!" With only the mildest visible curiosity, the other leviathans looked his way. A sense of intimidation washed over Kalec, but he quickly recognized it as his own uncertainty, not any disdain on their part. His life, as tragic as much of it had been, was less than nothing compared to the combined suffering of these venerable beings. That he had been considered an equal even for a time still daunted him. "Well?" Ysera finally responded. "If you wish to speak, then you should speak. Simple enough." Kalec was a little taken aback by her directness. Ysera had been the Dreamer. Now she saw nothing but waste in dreaming or even hesitating. "The contents of the Nexus-" "Is that all it is about?" She looked even less interested than before. "The concerns of any one dragonflight are its alone. You know that. Does your subject concern the rest of us in any way?" "Not directly-"
" 'Not directly.' Then, it doesn't, which means that discussion is at an end. Indeed, there doesn't seem to be any relevant discussion thus far." Turning to Alexstrasza, Ysera grumbled, "I told you, didn't I? I certainly remember wanting to! Yes . . . I did! I told you I thought it was a mistake even bothering to gather here, my sister-" "We have always met at this cycle of the twin moons. It would have been disrespectful not to." Nozdormu snorted again. "Disssrespectful to whom? Elune? The Mother Moon has her night elvesss to worship her. Disssrespectful to the titans or their servants, the keepers? We do not even know if the titansss exist anymore! It is certainly not disssrespectful to us. I agree with Ysera. This was a missstake. There is no point to the Accord anymore. If this gathering has any purpossse to it, it should be to finally put the Accord to rest and let each of us move on with our own problemsss." Kalec was stunned by the unexpected course of the brief conversation. He waited breathlessly for Alexstrasza to calm the other two down, but the LifeBinder did not argue. Indeed, Alexstrasza seemed to mull over Nozdormu's suggestion as if it had tremendous merit. The blue dragon abandoned his position, moving toward the center and in front of Alexstrasza as he faced the bronze. "But the Accord is not merely about us! It's become the backbone of all draconic interaction over the millennia! The Accord kept order among our flights, prevented catastrophe more than once! We knew that if we were united, there would always be hope-" " 'United,' " Ysera cut in. "Yes, we have been very united over the millennia, have we not? Neltharion . . . Malygos . . ." She looked as if she intended to say more, but with an apologetic glance at Nozdormu, she quieted. "Do not leave me out," the bronze grimly added. He stretched his wings. "Call him Murozond, lord of the infinite dragonflight, if you like, but that accursed dragon was my far future self and so I am to blame for his evils just as Neltharion was to blame for what he later did as Deathwing. . . ." Alexstrasza inserted herself at their center again. "Nay, Nozdormu! No one here finds fault with you for what you have not done! You fought alongside others against Murozond and altered that future forever! Had there been even the remotest blame on your part, it was erased with Murozond's undoing!"
Kalec and Ysera dipped their heads in agreement. The bronze's tail slowly slid back and forth, a sign of his gratitude for such words. Then his mood darkened again. "Yes . . . I fought my future self . . . when I had the power to fight. Now, I -we-are as any other dragon. The time of the Aspects is past and I say thus that the time of the Wyrmrest Accord is also." Again, Kalec noted no disagreement from the sisters. "But the three of you are the combined wisdom of our kind! The Aspects have always-" Ysera thrust her snout into his face. "We . . . are not . . . Aspects." "But the three of you are still-" "We understand your concern, Kalec," Alexstrasza said with such clear pity that Kalec winced. "But our time is done and Azeroth must look to other defenders." As she finished, Nozdormu strode past them toward one of the exits. Ysera followed suit. Kalec could not believe what he was seeing. "Where are you going?" The bronze leviathan looked over his shoulder. "Home. We are done here. We should not have even bothered to have this gathering." "He is correct on the last score," the Life-Binder agreed reluctantly-and only then did Kalec realize that he had been thinking of all of them in terms of titles they themselves clearly no longer acknowledged. They were, in their own eyes, simply three dragons among many now. "Alexstrasza! Surely you at least-" It was as if his mother stared down at him. The pity had been replaced by care. "Azeroth will survive without us. You-you who were thrust only so recently into all this-you will survive without us." Alexstrasza looked to the departing bronze. "Nozdormu! A moment! We will meet once more, in a month! If we are to dissolve the Accord, we shall do so with proper respect!" He paused, then glanced back. "You are correct. It does deserve the proper burial. Agreed. One month from this day." The gargantuan red focused on her sister. "Ysera?" "I agree. It makes perfect sense." Alexstrasza faced Kalec. So shocked that he was unable to speak, he vehemently shook his head.
"Three to one," the female red murmured. "So . . . it is decided." Nozdormu had not even waited for her declaration, the bronze and his lieutenant already moving on. Ysera and her daughter were close behind. Alexstrasza watched them for a moment, then turned and, with a grace incredible even for a dragon, slipped out behind Nozdormu and her sister. Afrasastrasz hesitated only long enough to give the blue a sympathetic expression before following her. Kalec had no choice but to follow or be left alone. Yet, despite his youth and swiftness, by the time he reached the outside, the others were already in the midst of going their separate ways. "Please reconsider!" he roared, his plea echoing throughout the wastes. Kalec's mind was awhirl. He had actually come here with troubles of his own that he had hoped to discuss with one or more of the elder dragons, and instead he found himself trying desperately just to keep the once seemingly eternal Accord together. Nozdormu spread his wings to their full span and took to the sky without so much as a last glance at the younger dragon. He was already a small dot when Ysera deigned to speak one final time. "In truth, we considered . . . yes . . . yes, we did . . . all this long ago. We just needed one of us to speak of it." The emerald behemoth leapt up into the air. "It was only chance that it happened here, barely after you arrived. I apologize for that, young Kalec." And then, there remained only Alexstrasza and him. "Fare you well, Kalec. I'm sorry that you came all this way for only a few empty moments . . . and such a turn of events as you certainly did not expect or deserve to be confronted by." With that, the great red took off, leaving a speechless Kalec to watch as the three vanished among the dark clouds enshrouding not only the wastes, but nearly all of the bleak continent of Northrend. What happened here? the blue asked himself over and over. What just happened here? For a brief time, Kalec had thought that things might be taking a turn for the better when he had agreed to stay in Dalaran and, as the mage Khadgar suggested, join the Kirin Tor. But soon, Kalec had seen the distrust in the eyes of
the other magi. He was a blue dragon; that was all that mattered to them. In the end, he had made excuses to Jaina, citing the need to oversee the Nexus's crumbling defensive spells and gather its substantial and powerful collection of artifacts together. Kalec had actually looked forward to this gathering, hoping for some encouragement on several fronts. His own dragonflight had all but fallen apart. With the debacle concerning the Focusing Iris and its theft, he had felt that he had failed in every regard as a leader and that had led to the mass exodus of the other blue dragons. The Nexus had become a place of emptiness, and at times, Kalec had found himself without the inclination to truly fight the departures. And now, the ones to whom he had desperately sought to turn had themselves turned from the world. A further irony was that despite wanting to come here, Kalec had considered not making the journey. He had been ashamed at his failure to find the Focusing Iris and the dreadful events that had come to pass because of that, especially the destruction of Jaina's own realm of Theramore. Kalec had at first not wanted to admit his humiliations to those who had considered him their equal despite the incredible difference in age and experience. Yet, in the end, Kalec had chosen to come . . . only to find himself in this new debacle. A chill ran down his spine that had nothing to do with the elements. The blue dragon looked back at Wyrmrest Temple, once a place of legend to him. Now, he suspected that he was staring at it, if not for the last time, then likely the next to last. Without the Accord, there was only one reason to come to this stark land . . . and that was to die. But for all his misery, Kalec was not yet ready for death. His youth might be a key factor in his failures, but it also urged him on, even if he had no idea what to do next. The wind picked up, its rush through the temple creating a surreal howl that finally stirred the blue to begin his own departure. With a beat of his wings, he rose high. Once airborne, the urge to be far from Wyrmrest magnified. Kalec focused on the direction home and increased his pace. But just as he left Wyrmrest behind, something nagged at his senses. Although no longer an Aspect, Kalec was still a blue dragon and thus more attuned to arcane magic in all its varied forms. The trace was so unique that
despite his mood, Kalec sought out its source. But a first glance at the landscape below failed to give the dragon any clue as to where it lay. Concentrating, Kalec managed to better pinpoint the general area. The catastrophe in the temple momentarily forgotten, the blue descended for a closer look. His path took him over the remains of more than one dragon. Despite the preservative qualities of the constant cold weather, the wind and other elements eventually wore away all recognizable traces of the dead. Even those already reduced to bone would someday not even be recognizable for the massive, proud beasts that they had once been. After what had happened in the temple, the finality of the scene below struck him anew, but he continued down despite misgivings. And then at last he sensed from where exactly the magical emanations originated. Kalec veered in that direction-and came to a jarring halt in the air. So stunned was he by what he beheld that it was all he could do to remember to keep flapping his wings. It was perhaps its gargantuan size that had permitted the skeleton to remain nearly intact even after so very long. Yet, almost as arresting as its incredible dimensions was the angle at which it lay. Nearly all the other frozen remains scattered through the vast, isolated region lay as if those dragons had simply gone to sleep. Indeed, most had done just so, landing and, with the aid and comfort of others of their kind, breathing their last with relatively little suffering. Not so, this mammoth creature. This leviathan had died violently. And so, in the bloody process, had many, many others. The cracked muzzle of the skull revealed part of a huge maw that could have engulfed Kalec. The lower jaw was nowhere to be seen. The neck area twisted in an awkward manner that revealed just how devastating the collision with the ground had been. The torso, too, lay violently twisted, the spine arched at an impossible angle. The half-buried ribs formed a winding tunnel that rivaled the great chambers of the temple in height. Within that macabre passage, Kalec pinpointed the location of the mysterious emanations. The dragon shuddered, feeling a sense of dread. Then, steeling himself, the blue leviathan dived in among the gigantic frosty bones.
Dived in among the bones of the Father of Dragons . . . Galakrond.
TWO AMONG THE DEAD
Kalec landed within the ribs with some lingering trepidation. Even though he knew it was only his imagination, there was the constant feeling that the bones might now stir, that Galakrond would rise and engulf him. Even the howling of the wind through the bones seemed to take on a supernatural life, as if the spirits of all the dead dragons here tried to warn him of his folly. But Kalec still remained more driven by his curiosity. Besides, he had nothing to return to at the moment except more troubles. The blue had to crouch as he neared the location he sought, so deep had Galakrond's corpse sunk into the harsh soil. That added a claustrophobic touch to an already uneasy situation, but still Kalec was undeterred. He had never sensed a magical trace such as this and found it most curious that it should happen near a place that he had visited more than once. At first, it occurred to him that perhaps someone had recently set it into place; after all, the rotting servants of the undead Scourge had spent much time excavating the skeleton, their leader hoping to animate the bones and create a monstrous frost wyrm. However, they had been driven away before they could dig too deep and from what Kalec sensed, what he sought was buried very, very far down. With that in mind, the blue could not help but think that whatever drew him here had lain undisturbed for a long, long time-likely since these remains had fallen here. The dragon concentrated, then exhaled. A purple sphere formed in the air, then drifted gently to the spot. As it touched the soil, a slight mist arose. Under Kalec's guidance, the magical globe melted away thousands upon thousands of years of frost and ice, then slowly burrowed into the ground beneath. But barely had Kalec's spell pushed below the surface than the sphere faded. Despite the blue's best efforts to keep the spell intact, the globe finally dissipated far short of its goal. Peering in frustration at the shallow hole, Kalec stretched his forepaws wide. Arcane bands of energy draped over the hole, scratching away the ground. As if
guided by invisible hands, the bands continued to scrape away at the spot as Kalec watched. The blue dragon's eyes finally narrowed in satisfaction as the hole grew deeper and deeper- Images flashed through his mind. A yellowish proto-dragon arguing with an orange one. A charcoal-gray proto-dragon laughing harshly. A robed and hooded figure-a humanoid figure with one arm visible. A white proto-dragon shrieking as it shriveled to a skeleton. Another dragon, faint hints of green remaining, flying toward Kalec. Dry skin hung limply on rotting bone, and the eyes of the oncoming creature were milky white and without life . . . and yet still it charged forward, ready to strike. With a roar, Kalec stumbled back. He crashed into the rib cage, which, sealed in place by layer upon layer of ice, not only held against the blue's weight, but left the dragon momentarily stunned by the collision. What-what just happened? Kalec shook his head, then eyed the hole. At some point, the second spell had also faded, but for the moment, Kalec cared only about the visions. They had been so lifelike that he had felt as if he had been there participating in the brief scenes. Yet, none of the images made any sense, especially the last, exceedingly ominous two. Shaking his head again, the blue investigated the hole. More than ever, he could sense the source of the emanations very near. He only had to dig a little deeper. Rather than risk a third spell, Kalec hunched over and began tearing at the dirt and frost with his claws. Digging still required great effort, but he made respectable progress. The emanations grew stronger, yet no more visions assailed him. A soft, lavender aura rose from the hole. Kalec immediately hesitated. When nothing else happened, he cautiously dug around the edges. At first, he was rewarded only with more dirt, but as Kalec shifted his attention to the center, his claws finally came into contact with something other than earth. With a delicate touch his reptilian form belied, the dragon brought forth a small octagonal object made from some metal that Kalec could not identify. It reminded him of gold, but if he held it a different way, it looked as if it were
simple iron. Tilted in another direction, it took on the brilliant white appearance of rare palladium. And all the while, the lavender aura surrounded it . . . yet also seemed separate, as if it were clouds over a tiny, oddly shaped world. Fascinated, Kalec sought to probe the mysterious artifact. The moment he tried, though, the aura faded. The blue quickly ceased his probing, but the aura did not return. Indeed, now the emanations had also ceased. The dragon growled. He almost put the tiny artifact down, but finally clutched it tight. Backing up, Kalec located a spot where the gap between ribs was wide enough for him to exit. As he stepped out in the open, the gnawing feeling that he was being watched overtook him. Kalec looked to his right. The empty eye sockets of the Father of Dragons met his gaze. Kalec let out a grim laugh at his momentary paranoia. He glanced down at the artifact one more time in order to make certain his grip was good, then took to the heavens. As the blue left the desolation below, he found himself breathing much easier. Kalec grunted and turned his attention to the Nexus. There, he thought he might be able to find out more about the object he carried. The blues had gathered much arcane knowledge during Malygos's millennia as Aspect of Magic, and even though Kalec himself no longer bore that title, the knowledge was still his for the studying. That there were other, more pressing matters, such as the dissolution of the blue dragonflight itself, had never left his thoughts. The artifact gave him a perfect excuse not to think about his latest failures, just as fulfilling the dangerous role of Aspect had once let him now and then try to forget Anveena. The blue dragon grimaced, then shook away such thoughts. Kalec arced. Wyrmrest Temple briefly came into view below. The blue hissed. Like the thing in his paw, it was a relic of the past, but unlike the artifact, for Kalec, the temple held no more interest. It was as dead a thing to him as the bones from which he had just departed. And as dead as the future he had once thought awaited him as an Aspect. •   •   • The Nexus was more than merely the realm of the Spell-Weaver and the blue dragonflight. It was a place of immense magical power, a gathering of forces from all Azeroth. Although its physical appearance was that of an icy, timeworn
fortress, the Nexus was actually a formation riddled with tunnels and caves, and had once been protected by an extensive and intricate series of wards that permitted only the blue dragons safe entrance. However, with the wards fading, Kalec's excuse for returning had more merit to it than even he had originally thought. Some distance away, two blue dragons soared through the air. Both headed south, whether intending to ever return, Kalec did not know. He tried not to think about their departure as he neared. Although Kalec had been late to the gathering at Wyrmrest, his tardiness had not been due to having to fly any greater distance than Alexstrasza and the rest. The Nexus was actually based on the frozen island of Coldarra-situated near the northwest edge of the Borean Tundra, which itself was a part of Northrend, the very same continent containing the Dragon Wastes. In truth, the journey had been a relatively short one. Kalec had been last to the Accord for reasons that he believed would have shocked even the legendary three. But all thought of either her or the Accord faded as Kalec entered the protective perimeter of the Nexus. He felt a gentle tingle as he passed through the invisible network of spells. For now they still held, but they were already even weaker than when he had left for the gathering. Kalec entered through the passage that led into his sanctum. Again and again, he sensed the brief, almost negligible touch of active spells. How much longer they would last, he could not say. Not too long, though. There was a sound from ahead. Another male suddenly crossed his path. Kalec, not expecting anyone in the Nexus, came to an abrupt halt. "Hail, Spell-Weaver," the older dragon intoned, at the same time bowing his head. It said something for the size of the passages that both not only could face each other with ease, but would be able to pass by when necessary. Shaking his head, Kalec replied, "That title is no longer mine, Jaracgos." "As you wish. I am glad that you returned when you did. I would have felt extremely guilty otherwise." Kalec tried to head off what he knew was coming. "Jaracgos, you don't-" "Please, I must speak." Although older, the other blue was smaller than Kalec. "I have loyally followed the Spell-Weaver my entire existence, be the one with that title Malygos or you. I have entered fierce battle, pursued dangerous
quests, and never shirked in any other duty. . . ." "I know that. You were one of those I always admired. You never sought glory for yourself. It is something I have tried to emulate." The elder dragon cleared his throat, a sound that echoed through the rocky passage. He looked down. "You only make this harder. Kalec, I have had notions I have long wished to pursue, interests in the arcane I never had the chance to study. To do so, I must travel far-" "You need not feel guilty for telling me this, Jaracgos," Kalec interjected softly. "I respect your choice and thank you for coming to me rather than simply departing without a word. To be honest, I thought when you'd left earlier, you were never coming back." The other dragon dipped his head in respect. "I will return on occasion." "Thank you. Safe journey." With another dip of his head, the second behemoth moved on. Kalec watched him for a moment, then continued on in silence toward his sanctum. He had his doubts as to whether Jaracgos would ever return. After all, Kalec had encouraged his fellow blue dragons to do as they desired, even if it meant forever following a path that took them farther and farther from the Nexus- Do not argue, Neltharion! a hissing voice roared in Kalec's mind. I do not argue! I fight! A stunning wave of vertigo overtook Kalec as the mysterious voices continued to argue. Images began to join them. A young, yellowish dragon with some resemblance to one he knew now. A high peak that reminded him of one to the east, only sharper, less polished by time. Through the barrage of mixing voices and flashing images he heard a female blue calling to him. Her voice was distant, indistinct, while the others grew stronger, more vivid. A dragon roared . . . and just as Kalec lost sense, he realized it was he. •   •   • Hunting had been good. The icy sea teemed with large creatures full of tasty meat and blubber. Some of his kind preferred to hunt the grazers-and they, too, could provide a welcome feast-but for the time being Malygos enjoyed seeking the shapes only half-seen in the depths and planning for the very moment when they drew near the surface. He liked a mental challenge, more so
than most of the other proto-dragons. Malygos took special pride in that; it meant to him that he was far more clever. The blue-and-white proto-dragon marked one last prey. He spread his wings, which were decorated with icy flakes. More than most, his particular kind was well-adapted to this region. Other "families" occasionally ventured up here, but the majority tended to stay in the warmer climes. Yet, today was to be one of those rare visitations. The shadow rushed over Malygos, soaring ahead at a speed he would have been hard-pressed to match. Kalec peered up in the sky in search of the other- Kalec. My name is Kalec, a part of Malygos suddenly thought with shock. What -what is happening? He wanted to turn and race back to the Nexus, but his body did not obey. Instead, it rose higher into the sky, seeking the mysterious proto-dragon whose shadow had passed by. It was not unheard of for members of one kind to attack another. Dominance was always important among proto-dragons. How do I know that? Kalec demanded helplessly. Where am I? Kalec could recall nothing after his agonized roar. He had apparently been unconscious. After that, he had no explanation as to why he would be here, flying over the water and seeing things through the eyes of Malygos. Kalec did not even understand how he knew that the body was that of his predecessor or how he also recognized that this was a very young Malygos from an era before there existed true dragons, much less the Great Aspects. Kalec/Malygos rose into the clouds. The proto-dragon sniffed the air, enabling Kalec to detect the presence of that other creature. It seemed that the blue could experience everything here, but had no choice as to movement or speech. It was as if he were a ghost sharing Malygos's form, even though the truth was more complicated. This young Malygos was the spirit . . . as was the entire world surrounding them, Kalec suspected. Suddenly, a fire-orange shape darted by, distracting both Malygos and Kalec. A female proto-dragon hesitated a short distance from the blue-and-white male. "No battle!" she roared. "I mean no harm!" Several new things shocked Kalec. First, what little he knew of proto-dragons had led him to believe that they were incapable of speech. He had assumed them the primitive, animalistic ancestors of his kind and nothing more.
But somewhere along the way, some had crossed a threshold. . . . The female anxiously waited for a response. Kalec recalled a glimpse of a fireorange proto-dragon in one of the earlier visions and suspected this was the same one. In addition, he again found something familiar about her. "No battle," Malygos agreed, much to her relief, and to Kalec's as well. Kalec realized that he was not surprised that Malygos also could speak, but only because the blue dragon had seen within the male, known his thoughts. This was not the Malygos he knew, but even this less sophisticated version was swift of thought. Malygos searched the heavens for other orange figures and, finding none, took a more dominant spot above the female. She, in turn, did not show any unease at his decision, whether a sign of good judgment or naïveté, Kalec did not yet know. "I am alone," she added. "Looking for another. A male of my kind. Clutch brother." Clutch brother. Kalec knew that term. Dragons from the same clutch of eggs were considered the closest of siblings. Kalec had been one of four, but was now the only survivor. He assumed that proto-dragons had larger clutches and thus more chances of survival for the young, but evidently familial bonds still existed, at least for some like this female. Malygos did not hesitate. "No others of yours." The female looked disappointed. "I have nowhere else to look." Kalec sensed Malygos's train of thought. She not being one of Malygos's breed, the male had no interest in the female, but he enjoyed proving his cunning. Besides, since he was neither hungry nor tired at the moment, the activity suited him. "There are other places. He hunts?" She thought for a moment. "He likes to find new places." This appealed to Malygos, who enjoyed such an activity himself. "If he is not here, he must be south. There is a trail?" "I know where he was. I do not know where he went." "Show me." But as the female veered around and Malygos started to follow, Kalec's world leapt forward in such a jarring manner that at first he lost all sense. As his mind settled again, he saw that the pair now flew over a rocky but warmer landscape.
"This is where?" Malygos finally asked. "Clutch brother was here?" "Yes." Once more, Kalec was taken by the conversational ability of the protodragon, but before he could pursue the question, a third, charcoal-gray protodragon flew into view from the west. The gray creature spotted the pair and immediately darted toward them. Malygos let out a low growl. Kalec, who had been expecting another simple meeting, realized that the two proto-dragons were about to do battle. "No fighting!" the female called. "No enemies!" "A waste!" snarled Malygos as he surged to meet the newcomer. "He is a stupid one! Not smart!" The gray suddenly opened wide his maw. A thunderous sound escaped. Kalec suffered along with Malygos as the shockwave struck like a hammer, sending his host spiraling backward. Without hesitation, the gray eagerly pursued. Unlike the first two protodragons, this one was as Malygos had indicated and akin to those with which Kalec was familiar-an unthinking beast. Malygos managed to right himself just in time. He exhaled in turn, and a chilling frost enveloped the oncoming gray. The attacking proto-dragon spun, his wings and head frozen, then dropped below Malygos. Malygos dove after, which proved a mistake. The gray shook off the effects of his foe's blast and, still spinning, accidentally caught Malygos directly across the chest with his tail. Kalec wanted to gasp along with his host as the air was shoved from Malygos's lungs. The icy-blue proto-dragon fought to keep aloft as he nearly blacked out. Kalec uselessly urged him on, but also felt consciousness slipping away. Then, a burst of flame caught the gray in the face. The gray roared in pain, the fire having struck close to his eyes. He shook his head, blinded. Recovering, Malygos unleashed another cold blast just as a second plume of fire also struck. Under the double onslaught, the gray retreated. He continued to roar, in both agony and frustration, as he fled the pair. Malygos gazed up at the female, allowing Kalec to do the same. She looked both relieved and confused.
"He was scared. I did not want to fight. He gave no choice." " 'Scared'?" Malygos snorted, and Kalec puzzled over her explanation. He shared his host's low opinion of their attacker. "Hmmph! Very stupid beast! Not smart, like me! Not smart like Malygos!" "You are smart, Malygos," she agreed. "Smarter than me." Although Malygos accepted her words as fact, Kalec suspected that the fireorange proto-dragon was smarter than she had thus far revealed. "I am smart," repeated Malygos, taking pride in the compliment. "I will find your clutch brother, Alexstrasza." Alexstrasza! Kalec observed the young female through his host's eyes, finally recognizing traits in the smoother, slimmer face. Yes, this was Alexstrasza, but a much younger one he would never have believed could be the Life-Binder. The pair had apparently told each other their names sometime in that lost period between the two parts of the maddening vision. Curiously, Alexstrasza only nodded disinterestedly. She continued to eye the direction in which their brief adversary had fled. "So scared. He attacked us because he was scared. Why was he scared?" Not having noticed that himself, Malygos simply shrugged. Again, Kalec shared his predecessor's disinterest. He only wanted to escape this madness. He wondered what was happening to his body. Another attack of vertigo overwhelmed him. Kalec floated in darkness for a moment, then once again returned not to the Nexus, but rather to some other vision seen through young Malygos. They were in what to Kalec's judgment was some other part of the same jagged landscape. The sky was as overcast as that over Northrend. A mournful howl rose from his-Malygos's-side. Malygos seemed to know what it entailed, for despite Kalec's desire, his host did not immediately turn toward the cry. Only when the howl continued unabated did he finally look. And there Kalec at last beheld Alexstrasza, her snout pointed to the sky, her cry one of terrible loss. Had he a body of his own, Kalec knew that he would have felt a chill up and down his spine, so terrible was the sound. Alexstrasza's wings draped the ground like a shroud. Her body rocked back and forth and her tail scraped the rocky soil over and over.
As Malygos had promised, he had found her clutch brother . . . or what remained of him. Kalec now wished that his host would turn away, but Malygos eyed the corpse with growing interest as he tried to make sense of the death. Alexstrasza's sibling had perished violently-not a surprise in this world-but he had not simply been slain in some duel with another proto-dragon. No breath weapon with which Kalec was familiar or that even Malygos recognized would have left the corpse in such a horribly desiccated state. The fire-orange male was nothing more than a shriveled mass of skin and bone. And what was worse, the contorted visage gave every indication that Alexstrasza's brother had suffered throughout the entire monstrous process. Alexstrasza continued to mourn. Malygos, however, suddenly shivered. A sense of unease filled Kalec's host, though it was clear to Kalec that Malygos did not understand why the feeling now overwhelmed him. A vast shadow blanketed the area. It vanished as swiftly as it had appeared. Malygos rose into the air, spinning so that he could quickly see in every direction, but all that was visible was the thick cloud cover. No. There was something high above, just discernible to Kalec for a moment. He tried to urge Malygos to look in that direction. His host finally did. At the same moment, whatever lurked above briefly darted through the bottom of the cloud cover. But before Kalec could focus, his surroundings became a chaotic maelstrom of unintelligible voices, roars, and momentary images so brief that he could make sense of none of them. And then . . . the blackness engulfed him once more.
THREE FATHER OF DRAGONS
Kalec? Kalec? Her voice was the first thing to pierce the darkness and it drew him back to waking. He mumbled what should have been her name, although even to his ears the sounds made no sense. The former Aspect opened his eyes, expecting both to be still lying in the tunnel and to have her leaning over him. Which of those would shame him more, he could not say. But when he peered around, it was to find himself alone . . . and no longer lying in the passage. Somehow, he had come to be transported to the gigantic cavern that was his sanctum. More perplexing, he even lay in his favored sleeping spot. But the question of how Kalec had gotten here was a minor one to the blue. What was more important was what had happened after he had blacked out. How long he had been lost within, Kalec did not know, but he did have a very good idea as to the source of the startling visions. Uncurling stiff digits, the dragon beheld the seemingly insignificant artifact. A curse escaped him at sight of it and he almost threw it against one of the cavern walls. Thinking better of it, the dragon instead turned toward a shadowy part of his sanctum. Kalec drew forth a bit of that shadow. From within, there emerged a large cubic shape that expanded before his eyes, growing immense enough to contain a night elf. Had Kalec desired it larger, he could have expanded it with only a thought. The arcane prisons had been created for a variety of tasks, including what the second half of their name indicated. This was but one of many secreted in the Nexus, and Kalec had chosen it because it was emptier than most. Blue energy crackling all around it, the massive cube floated slightly above the ground. To an onlooker, it resembled a large box seemingly made of wood and stone and lined at each edge by a bronze, metallic border. Rich blue seals ran across the center of each of the four sides from the top to the bottom, and a
dark border ran across the middle, as if the top and bottom were separate halves kept together only by the seals and border. At the former Aspect's unspoken command, the seals fell away and the metallic border faded. Now acting like a lid, the upper half tipped open. Not all arcane prisons functioned in this manner; this one, being designed specifically for storage, could also open in several other ways, depending on what Kalec needed of it. Thrusting his paw inside, the dragon deposited the artifact. There, it not only would be safe from other eyes, but would no longer be able to taint his thoughts. Resealing, the arcane prison vanished again. Exhaling in relief, Kalec recalled the voice that had brought him back from the blackness. This was not the first time that she had reached out to him since his departure from Dalaran. After their last meeting, she had no doubt assumed that he would contact her again, but he had found so many reasons not to, including his certainty that even she blamed him in part for not finding the Iris. They could not continue this charade, Kalec decided not for the first time. There was no path ahead that the two of them could travel together- And yet, once again, her voice touched him. Kalec . . . Kalec . . . speak to me. . . . He wanted to ignore her, but his will had been too weakened by the visions. Besides, Kalec told himself, as an archmage-perhaps the greatest one not with the blood of a dragon coursing through her veins-she might know something of the magic that would create a thing like what he had found. Jaina was, after all, the one who had helped him sense the Focusing Iris when his own efforts had failed. From that hunt alone, he considered her in many ways far more cunning, more adaptable than he . . . and that made him all the more shamed by his own failures. When she called to him again, Kalec finally answered. I am here, Jaina. As he replied, two things also happened. The least of those was a gap that opened in the air before him, a gap in the center of which formed the large circular image of a walled chamber he knew was hundreds of miles away. In that image, a feminine figure began to take shape. But even before that took place, Kalec himself went through a transformation. He shrank, becoming only a fraction of his original size. The
dragon stood on his hind legs, which reversed at the knees and became like those of a man even as the forelegs became matching arms. Kalec's wings and tail shriveled, finally vanishing. His snout receded into his face, which lost its scale and deep blue tint, at last refining into a pale but handsome young face worthy of any of the elven races. The most obvious hints remaining of his true self were his long blue-black hair and the hunter's garments he now wore, which were also of a dark blue and black. Kalec straightened, in many ways more comfortable as he was now than when a dragon. In this form, he had learned what it was like to truly live, to truly understand happiness . . . and pain. Indeed, often there were moments when he wished that he had been born as the humanoid creature he pretended to be here. As he finished transforming, the figure in the image also became fully distinct. However, unlike Kalec, the woman before him was exactly what she appeared to be. Human. Beautiful. So very powerful. And still so young for all she had been forced to experience. Kalec could see how recent events had done even more to harden her, although she tried to pretend that she had not changed. Jaina Proudmoore had not asked to become leader of the Council of Six-the council of wizards ruling the realm of Dalaran -but she had been the one to whom the other powers had turned after the sacrifice of her predecessor, Rhonin. Jaina, the daughter of the late, legendary- and some would also say infamous-grand admiral Daelin Proudmoore, had also had to balance her duties on the council with governing the island kingdom of Theramore. All that would have been too much for many creatures-dragons included- but in addition, Jaina had had to deal with both her part in her father's death and her failure to save Theramore from eventual destruction at the brutish hands of the Horde. We are two of a kind, Kalec thought as he beheld her. He kept his expression neutral as she focused on him. In contrast, Jaina smiled gratefully, as if Kalec had granted her a special favor in finally responding. That only made him feel worse. "I was beginning to worry about you." Her voice was rich and melodious- at least to Kalec-but tinged with past pains and regrets.
He marveled that she had the wherewithal to continue as she did, despite her grief for all those slain in Theramore and her remorse over what she had planned to do against Orgrimmar with the stolen Focusing Iris. Of course, that was also why he both admired and felt a bond with her. "I appreciate your concern, Jaina, but I am fine." "Are you?" She leaned closer, almost seeming able to touch him. Her gaze bored into Kalec, who felt as if the mage could read into what passed for a dragon's soul. "You aren't sleeping enough. I can see that. You're driving yourself too much. All this work can wait a little longer-" "It has to be done," he blurted out too quickly. He was as surprised as she looked by the obvious bitterness tingeing his words. Jaina recovered almost immediately, compassion replacing the surprise. The compassion only made Kalec more abashed. "How are you?" he asked in a deliberate change of subject. "How fares the Kirin Tor?" Despite understanding just what he was doing, she allowed the change. "We still struggle to keep things together, but we're doing it. You know as well as I do how things have turned upside down since your last visit. I've been forced to make some changes I don't like, but they're necessary." When Jaina did not elaborate on those changes, Kalec did not press. He wanted very much to help her, but what could he, who could do nothing for himself, do for her? Perhaps it is time to end this, the dragon decided. Perhaps we can do nothing for one another- An image of the young Alexstrasza burned through his mind. Kalec could neither suppress a gasp nor keep his body from shivering. Unfortunately, Jaina noted both. "Kalec! Are you ill-" A dragon's roar-or, more likely, a proto-dragon's-drowned out whatever else she said. Still, the blue managed to put on a veneer of strength before the mage. "As you said, I've not gotten enough rest. My apologies for frightening you." He tried very hard to sound indifferent, hoping that she would believe that he was well. Kalec was not certain if his thinking was clear, but he had to hope it
was, for other sounds and images were already assailing him. Jaina remained where she was. Her expression was unreadable. "Are you sure you're all right?" The image of another proto-dragon corpse took his attention. There was something even more unsettling about this one, but the image vanished before Kalec could make sense of just what it was that bothered him. The sounds, especially the voices, grew maddening. "Yes!" he called too loudly. "Forgive me! I've a council to convene!" No longer caring if his excuses made sense, Kalec dismissed the vision of the mage. Jaina faded away just as she looked ready to say something. The former Aspect stumbled to the center of his sanctum, already reeling from the onslaught of voices and jumbled images. He was grateful that neither Jaina nor any of his dragonflight could see him staggering. Kalec fell to his knees. He managed to plant a hand against the smooth rock floor, a hand partially scaled and with long, wicked nails. Unable to focus, Kalec contorted as his body sought some balance between his true form and the humanoid one he had put on for Jaina's sake. His mouth and nose stretched forward and his legs shrieked with pain as his knees shifted back and forth. It was one thing to simply change from one shape to another, but to keep shifting between them took a toll that he had never suffered before. It was finally too much. Kalec fell forward- And once again soared through the air as some part of the young Malygos. Time had shifted again. Alexstrasza no longer accompanied Malygos, but there were other proto-dragons in the sky, proto-dragons of at least six different colors. Despite their differences, they appeared disinclined to fight one another, although Kalec suspected that could always change. Malygos radiated agitation, which in turn overtook Kalec. What bothered Malygos was not clear to Kalec. The proto-dragon had buried his thoughts deep this time, even seeming not to want to deal with them himself. Part of the reason for so many different proto-dragons in the same region became obvious as a vast herd of huge beasts-some sort of brown, hairy caribou-raced along the low, grassy hills below. Two proto-dragons had already dived down and snatched up ready meals, but a smaller, yellowish female failed to judge her dive and almost collided with the ground.
As she pulled up, she was joined by none other than Alexstrasza, who had just snatched up another of the grazers. Unlike the other hunters, the fireorange female had quickly bitten through the neck where the animal's great vein was located, killing it instantly. Kalec could sense Malygos's amusement at such a tactic; most proto-dragons preferred their prey alive and fresh until the last moment. Alexstrasza, though, appeared to almost feel guilty about having to hunt at all. She tried to offer the meal to the smaller female-who clearly needed nourishment-but the yellowish proto-dragon instead snapped angrily at her. Rather than grow furious herself, Alexstrasza continued to patiently attend to her companion. Even now, she takes care of the helpless, Kalec thought with admiration, thinking of Alexstrasza as the Aspect of Life. Here, so very young, she still revealed far more concern for others than most. Malygos lost interest for the moment in the two females, forcing Kalec's perspective to shift to watching other hunters. The proto-dragon took mild interest in a coarse brown male's technique. The other male would hover over the running herd, then, seemingly prescient, dive toward it just as it made a sharp turn designed to put the winged predators off their mark. Not so the brown male. In fact, he seemed to know at just what angle and what speed the grazers would turn. Where more than one other hunter ended up only with mounds of torn dirt and grass, he plucked up two tasty morsels in rapid succession. Malygos admired the other's cleverness and timing, then lost interest as two of the hunters who had failed to snag their quarry now hissed and spat at one another. No words passed between them. Like the gray male Kalec and his host had encountered previously, these proto-dragons were little better than the savage cats or wolves roaming other parts of the world. Malygos watched their angry fight with contempt, while Kalec again wondered why some protodragons had progressed toward sentience while others had not. A few other proto-dragons in the midst of devouring their meals also watched, some with clear intelligence, others like beasts wary that the fighters might try next to steal their food. One blue-green male sneered at the pair, then glared at Malygos when he realized Kalec's host was watching him.
Coros. The name came to mind as if Kalec knew the other male himself. Malygos obviously did, and the enmity between them was clear. Coros hissed at his rival, then thrust his muzzle into his fresh kill. The blue-green male ripped free a hefty portion of bloody meat, then chewed it while staring at Malygos as if it had been torn from the latter's throat. Kalec sensed Malygos considering fighting Coros, but the dangerous train of thought was interrupted by the alighting of the small, yellowish female near him. She snorted in frustration as Alexstrasza, still gripping the carcass, landed next to her and across from Kalec's host. "My brother . . ." began the smaller proto-dragon hesitantly. "My sister says you found him." It startled both Malygos and Kalec that this was Alexstrasza's sibling. Their colors were different, though her yellow tint was also not like that of the two other families Kalec knew existed thanks to Malygos. The only similarity between the females was their smooth, nearly glass-like skin, so different from the typical rough hide of most proto-dragons. "We were three in the clutch. Three to survive. Now, only two." Malygos dipped his head in understanding. For proto-dragons a surviving clutch of only three eggs meant ill tidings for the family. Indeed, in many a healthy proto-dragon family, a sickly offspring such as the yellow female would have been slain at hatching. She seemed to be waiting for some more elaborate response from Malygos. He finally said, "Your clutch brother. His death was strange." It was certainly not how Kalec would have replied if he were in Malygos's place, but Alexstrasza's sister seemed pleased. "Yes! He died strangely! How did he die?" "I do not know." The smaller female leaned closer. "There was another-" "No, Ysera!" interrupted Alexstrasza sharply. "We agreed that-" Whatever she said next was lost to Kalec, who took advantage of Malygos's view to stare in amazement at yet another of the Great Aspects. Having known the Ysera of recent times-Ysera the Awakened-he could not imagine how this weaker creature could have become one of the most powerful forces in all Azeroth.
Snapping and hissing brought Kalec's attention back to what Malygos was experiencing. Alexstrasza and Ysera, their necks bent back, maneuvered as if seeking to fight one another. Each displayed her sharp teeth and claws to her utmost, even Ysera proving capable of an incredibly menacing showing. Several times both heads darted in, but then pulled back once more. Kalec knew such confrontations from his own kind and could generally recognize what was real and what was simply normal display, but with the sisters it was hard to tell. The jaws of both Ysera and Alexstrasza snapped dangerously close to the other's throat and the claws scraped against hides more than once. And then . . . a sound louder than thunder stilled not only the sisters, but every proto-dragon in the vicinity. The sound erupted again, shaking the rocky ridges upon which Malygos and many of the other hunters perched. Several of the proto-dragons were cowed, and Kalec felt even Malygos fight not to prostrate himself. Only then did Kalec realize that the incredible noise was a gigantic roar. A vast region of the overcast sky broke away, descending with astonishing swiftness. The velocity caused the clouds to quickly scatter, revealing a sight that truly could daunt not only a proto-dragon, but even the most powerful of Kalec's own kind. This was supposed to be a proto-dragon, but so immense was its size that not even a dragon could be chosen for an adequate comparison. Kalec could think of no creature save one that could be used . . . and that would have meant comparing Galakrond to himself. Even though Kalec had never seen the gigantic Galakrond in the flesh, the remote possibility that he would not have recognized this titanic being had been eliminated by Galakrond's name racing over and over through Malygos's mind. In addition, through his host's brief glimpse away from the Father of Dragons to the other proto-dragons, Kalec saw that not one of the hunters remained in the sky. Galakrond now commanded the world above, and there was no protodragon foolish enough to challenge that rule. He swooped down, passing over the entire region in a matter of seconds. In Galakrond's wake there came a vicious wind that even tore several protodragons from their roosts and sent more than one meal toppling to the ground
far below. Galakrond's roar was no less ground-shaking miles away, forcing Malygos and the sisters to grip their perches tighter. For such a colossal creature, Galakrond turned with remarkable agility. Once more, he passed over the now-panicking herd, but this time with intent. Galakrond seized up two caribou in each of his much larger hind paws and scooped up another whole in his gargantuan maw, then rose up. The grazer in his mouth vanished down his gullet and a moment later so did both of those in his left hind paw. By the time Galakrond leveled, all five of his catches were well on their way down to his stomach. But five was not enough. Galakrond veered back and lunged toward the scattering prey. This time, however, he suddenly pulled back. Confused at first, Kalec watched as the bending of the vast wings during the halt created a windstorm that sent dozens of beasts rolling uncontrollably. Before several of the caribou could rise to their feet, Galakrond plucked them up. With at least eight claimed that Kalec could see, the Father of Dragons soared back into the clouds. It was not until several seconds after Galakrond's departure that the first proto-dragons dared move. There was no renewal of the hunt; not only were the caribou scattered so far and wide that pursuit would have required too much effort, but most of the proto-dragons were still too shaken up by Galakrond's startling manifestation. Some took to the sky themselves and fled for calmer climes. Others remained subdued. The Father of Dragons . . . Kalec could still not believe the stunning image. To witness Galakrond alive was something he could never have imagined. The blue knew little of Galakrond save that he had been one of the largest beings to roam Azeroth and that he had represented the shift from proto-dragon to true dragon. It was not that Galakrond had actually fathered all true dragons -that was a myth somehow spread millennia ago-but that after him had come the five Aspects and their respective dragonflights. Proto-dragons had all but vanished after that. There were other legends concerning Galakrond, but, in truth, Kalec understood that only his three counterparts knew the truth. He had never thought to ask them about the Father of Dragons, but now wished that he had. Yet, Kalec's momentary awe soon gave way again to his anger and
frustration-and growing concern-over his being trapped in these ancient visions. Each one seemed more and more lifelike, as if his own time were the fantasy and this scene now were the true present. Not for the first time, he tried to will himself back, but nothing changed. He continued to be an insignificant, unnoticed phantasm trapped within Malygos. Not even Alexstrasza or Ysera-both of whom in the future would have abilities that should make them sense his presence-so much as glanced in curiosity at the male beside them. I will be free! Kalec abruptly roared, though his roar went unheard by any save himself. Bereft of a throat-or a body-he felt like nothing but a memory remembered by no one. Laughter filled his-or rather, Malygos's-ears. Kalec at first thought that someone mocked him, but instead, the laughter was aimed at the other protodragons by a charcoal-gray male a bit larger than most, who actually sneered at the others. "Little hatchlings!" he bellowed. "Afraid of the sky! Afraid of the ground! Galakrond laughs at you for being afraid, and I, Neltharion, do, too!" Some of the proto-dragons hissed at the gray male, but no one challenged him. By their glances, they knew him to be strong and able to back up his taunt. Even those proto-dragons who clearly had little more intelligence than their prey appeared to know better than to fight- Neltharion? The name finally penetrated. Kalec sought in vain to seize control of Malygos's body as the newcomer, still laughing, flew off. Where Galakrond had been a startling, unsettling thing of legend, this gray male represented a danger to the future of all life on Azeroth. If there was a creature more evil than Neltharion, Kalec could not think of one. Of course, by the blue's time, the gray male would be better known by his more apt title . . . Deathwing.
FOUR UNLIKELY ALLIES
Azeroth had suffered many terrible times and menaces, the demons of the Burning Legion and the Sundering but two of the most devastating. Yet, to the dragons, to many inhabitants of the world, there had been no greater peril than the mad Aspect. From the War of the Ancients ten thousand years ago to recent times, he who had once been the Earth-Warder had sought the destruction of all things. Deathwing was gone now and at tremendous sacrifice, but Kalec, still able to watch Neltharion flying into the clouds through Malygos's gaze, wondered how Azeroth would have fared if Deathwing had never been. Follow him! he urged Malygos, to no avail. Follow him and end the horror before it begins! His host did nothing. Malygos lost interest not only in Neltharion, but also in all else going on around him. Without a word to Alexstrasza or Ysera, he leapt into the air and headed to the north. A few proto-dragons nearby hissed at Malygos as he passed, but the icy-blue male ignored them. He had eaten his fill and only wanted to curl up in his remote cavern for a long, pleasant nap while he digested his meal. That Kalec had no desire to do the same was, as usual, lost upon the proto-dragon. But suddenly something hard collided with Malygos from behind. He rolled in the sky, then began to plummet. As he struggled to regain control, both he and Kalec caught a glimpse of the cause of their troubles. Coros and another male of the same hue dived down to attack. Malygos managed to slow his descent, but could still not right himself. Coros and his comrade hissed eagerly as they neared. Malygos opened his mouth. A shower of icicles shot forth. Coros evaded them, but the other proto-dragon did not entirely avoid being struck. The icicles slashed through one wing. But once more Malygos was hit from behind as a third foe entered the fray. Kalec, helplessly watching, guessed that Coros had set up this attack before
Galakrond's appearance. From Malygos's jumbled thoughts, Kalec picked up bits of a long rivalry over territory, prey, and who was more cunning. At the moment, it seemed that Coros had the advantage in the last. Coros exhaled, and what appeared to be a web of smoke enveloped Malygos. The icy-blue male fought for breath as the smoke sealed off his nostrils and mouth. Despite his wounds, the first of Coros's companions reentered the struggle. With an eager expression, the proto-dragon opened wide as he sought Malygos's throat. Thunder roiled . . . or rather a sound like thunder. Malygos's wounded attacker dropped as if hit by a thousand dwarven hammers. A hearty laugh followed the jarring sound. Kalec saw a gray blur cross Malygos's path, then collide with Coros. "You want a fight? Fight me!" cried Neltharion as he grappled with Malygos's rival. This was a foe that Coros could not have counted on, but he did not back down. He opened wide . . . and Neltharion slammed the blue-green's jaw up, closing the mouth at a critical moment. Coros jerked away from his opponent. The blue-green male clawed at his mouth, ripping away scale and skin until he managed to open it again. Neltharion's act had managed to turn the other proto-dragon's breath weapon against him in a manner that both Malygos and Kalec admired. However, the gray's amusement at his success left him open to the third of the attackers. The remaining blue-green landed atop Neltharion, wrapping his hind paws around the gray's throat. At the same time, he sought to bite through one of Neltharion's wings. But in the next second the gray's foe was torn free of his prey by Malygos, who had finally had the opportunity to recover. Malygos ripped at the other proto-dragon's wings and neck, scoring two strong strikes. Blood splattered his muzzle as he tore into his target. A wildly flapping wing hit Malygos hard in the face. It startled him enough to make him loosen his grip. His adversary used that moment to pull free. Rather than turn to fight, the wounded leviathan retreated as swiftly as he could. Another of the attackers soared past Malygos. Only belatedly did Kalec and
his host note that fleeing figure as Coros. Of the final member of the treacherous trio, there was no sign. "Too short! Cowards! Come! Fight again!" Neltharion roared after the two diminishing figures. Despite their clear victory, Malygos radiated no interest in wreaking further damage on his old rival. He watched silently as the gray continued to berate the losers until they were out of sight. Finally losing interest, Neltharion spun to face Malygos. "You fight good! Not as good as Galakrond, not as good as me, but good!" Malygos nodded. "You fight very good. Malygos thanks you." The attempt at gratitude received a hearty laugh. "No! Thank you! It was a good fight!" Malygos did not shrink from a battle but, unlike Neltharion, did not savor it. Within, Kalec remained torn between being relieved that Neltharion had come to their aid and feeling anxious that the future Deathwing hovered before them. "A good fight, yes," the icy-blue proto-dragon finally agreed. "We are brothers in blood," Neltharion continued, shifting closer. "Both smarter than the others, too!" The other proto-dragon did not disagree. For all his bluster, Neltharion was clever. Malygos's interest turned to another astonishing subject stirred up by a chance mention from the gray. "Galakrond. He never hunts here. Why now? You know?" "Ha! Galakrond hunts where Galakrond wishes!" Yet, after saying that, Neltharion paused. After visible consideration, he added, "More food. Yes, more food here." "More food," Malygos agreed. A horrifying thought occurred to the protodragon. "Our food!" Neltharion understood immediately. "Our food . . . not good." "No. Not-" Something on one of the nearby hills to Malygos's right caught the proto-dragon's attention. Malygos immediately glanced that way, enabling Kalec to also look. "They come back?" the gray eagerly asked, referring to Coros and the other two. "No." Malygos remained distracted by whatever he had noticed, but his
thoughts remained murky to Kalec. Malygos suddenly arced toward those hills, a curious Neltharion accompanying him. They arrived but scant seconds later, whereupon Malygos began to survey the vicinity. "Nothing here," Neltharion concluded long before his companion was satisfied. "No enemy to fight. Shame." "No enemy," Malygos reluctantly agreed. "I-" Again, the future Aspect noticed something at the edge of his vision. This time, he reacted even more quickly. "Something?" the gray asked with rising interest. Malygos squinted. Kalec saw nothing through his host, but felt Malygos tense as if he did. So powerful a sensitivity . . . The words were not Kalec's. Nor were they Malygos's thoughts. Despite being well aware by now that he had no true voice, Kalec could not hold back a gasp of discovery. To him, part of the landscape moved, a ripple little bigger than a tall human. It moved only a short distance to the side and did so slowly, almost as if seeing what would happen. To the eyes of most, it would have been unnoticeable, and Neltharion was evidence of that. He snorted and peered elsewhere while he patiently waited for Malygos to finish. Look there! Look there! Kalec demanded fruitlessly, yet it became clear to him that Malygos did not quite see what he did. Malygos finally gave up, turning back to Neltharion- In that one instant, Kalec-not his host-saw what watched. And, as he did, the world spun madly. Kalec became lost in a black maelstrom. He had nothing upon which to grab hold, either physically or mentally. The blue sank into a dark, endless hole- Only to wake up on the floor of his sanctum, his body-his still-contorted, part-dragon, half-elven body-awash in sweat. Groaning, Kalec dragged himself toward a nearby wall. As he approached, a small, shimmering fountain of silver water rose from thin air. It directed itself toward the slowly transforming dragon, who opened his stretching muzzle wide and swallowed the cool, refreshing contents. As the magical liquid coursed through him, Kalec's mind began to reorganize itself. His first thought was not about what he had seen in that last moment, but
about the true bane of his existence. Managing to rise, the blue dragon returned to the secret place where he had put the artifact. Not at all to his surprise, it glowed as he had first noticed in the wastes. The glow faded immediately, but Kalec was not fooled. The artifact was active and had probably been active from the moment that he had sensed its existence. Kalec no longer cared for what purpose it had been designed. He wanted nothing more than to either destroy it or cast it far, far away. Well aware of the potential for disaster when dealing with any magical object, Kalec chose the latter course. He pictured a place obscure to most and used a spell to send the accursed artifact there. An immense wave of relief overcame him. Kalec slumped back, grateful for the peace of the moment. Without meaning to, his attention returned to the essence of the visions. Malygos, Alexstrasza, Ysera, and Neltharion. Four of those who would change Azeroth forever as its guiding Aspects. Kalec assumed that somewhere in those visions, a young Nozdormu had also appeared. The analytical part of Kalec wondered what the visions meant; the emotional part wanted nothing to do with them. Each vision burned deeper into the blue's mind. Kalec feared that if they had progressed, the visions would have eventually stolen his mind. He returned to the magical fountain, a creation of his own that now proved highly beneficial. At last satiated, Kalec forced the visions from his thoughts. He had more important, more immediate, concerns- A thing of horror rose before him, a cadaverous dragon with sunken white eyes and shriveled flesh. Rotting tongue dangling to the side, it lunged for Kalec - And vanished. Kalec shivered. His heart beat wildly. The stench of decay still lingered in his nostrils, even though it slowly dawned on him that what he had seen had not actually stood before him but rather had been a product of his imagination. It took much to unnerve one of his kind even for a moment, but this horrific sight had certainly done so. Kalec could still not shake the sense that he had smelled the apparition, although that was impossible. . . . As Kalec's calm returned, his first thought involved the artifact, but it was hundreds and hundreds of miles away. Kalec could not believe that it could
affect him from so far. Still, the more he recalled glimpses of the macabre illusion, the more details that hinted of the artifact's connection came to light. This had been no dragon, but a proto-dragon whose size had been shaped by Kalec's own mind . . . and the blue had not even thought about proto-dragons until finding the accursed thing under Galakrond's frozen bones. Galakrond . . . Voices arose all around Kalec, but he knew immediately that they came from within, not without. This thing is dead! This thing cannot fight! Kalec roared, his cry echoing through his sanctum. The roar did nothing to drown out the ever-increasing voices. The dragon desperately spun around, his tail crashing against a wall with such force that it cracked the rock. "I will not listen! I will not succumb!" So many dead . . . We cannot fight . . . It must be done, no matter the sacrifice. The last voice cut through the rest. With it came another manifestation in Kalec's mind, one so real that yet again he thought it stood before him. The hooded, robed figure. The phantasm vanished back into the darkness within. Kalec remained utterly still, afraid that if he even moved, the entire madness would begin again. When it did not, he took a long breath and thought hard. He could think of only one recourse. He would have to seek out Alexstrasza again. •   •   • For most, the task of finding her, the one who had once been the Life-Binder, would have proved daunting. Alexstrasza stayed in no place for very long, perhaps because if she did, she might dwell too long on what had been lost. Kalec understood that she had come to grips with the fact that the dragons as a race were no longer viable, that the last eggs had hatched and from here there would only be fewer and fewer dragons as time and circumstance took their toll. Yet, perhaps through some lingering link from their roles as Aspects or simply because he understood her more than he realized, Kalec located her after
only a few false trails. He flew low over the forested land, finally transforming to his humanoid form a good distance from his goal. He did the last not because he sought to surprise her, but rather so as not to frighten the inhabitants of the human village he had seen in the distance. The giggles of children reached him before he found her. Kalec saw the four youngsters playing among the trees just beyond the village's boundaries. The game of hide-and-seek seemed to be a fluid one, for the seeker appeared to change from one moment to the next. A man's voice called the children back into the village. There was always the danger of wolves or other threats, although this land appeared fairly peaceful in comparison to many in the changed world. Moreover, considering the two figures now nearby, the children and their village were, for a short time, safe from almost anything. "They seem very happy," Kalec commented. A part of the tree to his left separated. The facade of bark faded, revealing a beautiful, fiery-tressed woman dressed in form-fitting gold and crimson armor. She loomed over Kalec and appeared to be from some far more glorious and mysterious elven branch. A regal crimson cloak flowed behind her as she joined him. "They are so young," she murmured, her brilliant red eyes somber. "They have such vitality. I see why Korialstrasz enjoyed their particular kind so much." Kalec briefly bowed his head in memory of perhaps the most legendary of Alexstrasza's consorts even though his own relationship with Korialstrasz-who had also worked among the younger races as the mage Krasus-had been tempestuous at times, to say the least. They had come to an understanding well before the red male's death, but Kalec felt some guilt about the past schism whenever Alexstrasza brought up her beloved mate. "Humans hold much hope, but they do also hold much threat," he could not help finally responding. "The Lich King was once human." "And many of those who fought him hardest were human, too." She returned her gaze to the village. "Was there something you wanted?" He suddenly felt so very young, almost as young as the children they had been watching. "I wanted . . . I wanted to ask some things of you when we gathered at Wyrmrest, but the gathering ended so quickly, so abruptly. . . ."
Alexstrasza looked back. "I am so very sorry. We did not treat you with the respect we should have. The moment just overtook the rest of us. It is not an excuse. We were remiss." "I am aware that you three share something I can barely fathom. I am still honored that I was chosen, even if for a short time." Kalec exhaled sharply. "Alexstrasza. After the three of you left Wyrmrest, I found an artifact of an unsettling nature. I need your guidance-" " 'Guidance'?" For the first time, she did not look pleased with his presence. "My advice will avail you little, Kalec. I would think that you, being a blue, would certainly be better at deciphering some artifact's design and purpose than I. In fact-" The children ran into sight again. Although they remained within the confines of the village, their playing was still visible enough to draw Alexstrasza's attention. She clapped her hands together in delight as a small girl paused in her play to hug what was likely her slightly older brother. Kalec started to talk, then noticed how strained her smile actually was. He envisioned all the lost lives, especially those young like these children, and how they had affected the former Aspect inside. Alexstrasza herself had suffered more than most. Not only had all her eggs been destroyed by Korialstrasz-in the act sacrificing himself-to prevent their corruption into monstrous twilight dragons, and her ability to lay more had been forever taken away, but in addition to all that she lived with the knowledge that the other dragonflights had also suffered so. She might have accepted her loss of power, but not this loss of her kind's future. After all, she had been the Life-Binder. Stepping back, Kalec left Alexstrasza to her viewing. He could not bring himself to pursue matters with her. In silence, he strode deeper into the forest, waiting only until he was far enough not to frighten the humans before transforming into his true form and flying off. Twice now, his hopes of understanding and guidance from one of the elder dragons had ended in futility. Alexstrasza had even intentionally pulled away from him when he had mentioned the mysterious find. True, as a blue he was still more in tune with all facets of magic, but her experience might have proven invaluable. She-they-have withdrawn from the world, he realized. They have accepted their
loss of power, as have I, but now they no longer see themselves as part of Azeroth's future. . . . Kalec could only imagine how Alexstrasza and the others, with so many millennia of burdens upon them, felt- Dead! It is dead! It should not fight! Another! Beware! Another- Intense vertigo once again overtook Kalec. The blue dragon tumbled forward, dropping hard as he did. He crashed into several treetops before being able to right himself. The voices receded. Kalec, exhausted by the struggle, landed hard, then blacked out. He awoke what seemed barely a few seconds later. The voices had completely disappeared and no visions assailed him. Kalec rose gratefully, peering around as he tried to regain his bearings. The dragon's gleaming eyes widened in shock. He was no longer near the region where he had left Alexstrasza. The trees around him were more sparsely spread and a deep, twisting canyon stretched for miles to the north. This nameless location was far from any civilized area, either Alliance or Horde. Very likely few knew it to any degree, but of those few, Kalec suspected that he knew this region most of all. Some force had transported Kalec far across Azeroth . . . and the blue dragon had to look no further than the accursed artifact, which suddenly lay only a few yards before him, once more ominously aglow.
FIVE GALAKROND
The blue dragon exhaled furiously at the artifact, enveloping it in bitter frost. He brought down one heavy paw on the now-glistening relic. Where good steel -turned brittle by the magical chill-would have easily shattered, Kalec's odd nemesis retained every aspect of its essence, leaving the dragon with a very pained appendage. "You will not be my master!" the blue roared, not caring if anyone heard the echo of his voice. "Curse someone else, you fiendish toy!" The octagonal relic glowed brighter yet. Expecting the worst, Kalec immediately pulled back. Nothing happened. Kalec ran a paw over the piece, but still the artifact did nothing. Even then, the blue could not help feeling that with each passing second the mysterious object insinuated itself deeper and deeper into not only the dragon's mind, but also any soul one of his kind might have. Seizing up the relic, Kalec prepared to throw it deep into the valley. However, as he raised his arm, the limb ached terribly. Indeed, only now did the blue feel the stress and strain all over his body. Kalec felt as if he had flown halfway around the world- Flown . . . Testing his wings, Kalec found that they, too, moved with pain. The leviathan's anger kindled anew. It had been his own magic and muscle that had dragged him all the way to this land. He could only imagine how he had made the journey. Had he flown unconscious all that time? It does not matter! Kalec forcefully reminded himself. All that matters is to free myself from its foulness. . . . But how he could do that remained a question unanswerable. Rather than cast the artifact away again, Kalec pressed it tight to his chest, then leapt into the air. No sooner had he done so than Kalec abruptly veered north. As if by some miracle, he felt as if he suddenly knew how to divest himself of the monstrous
relic. With great sweeps of his wings, the blue dragon headed to the very place from which he had dug out the artifact. The frozen bones of Galakrond. Fighting his exhaustion, Kalec continued his hard pace and managed to reach the Dragonblight as dark approached. The wastes and the dragon graveyard came into view soon after. Kalec spotted the outline of the temple, then adjusted his path accordingly. Even in the gloom, the ancient behemoth's skeleton was somehow visible where the remains of the hundreds of other dragons who had passed on during the many successive millennia were now no more than dark mounds. Kalec landed in silence, feeling suddenly as if he disturbed their rest. Still, now that he had come this far, the blue had no intention of turning back. Recalling where he had dug up the relic, Kalec transformed, then created a faint golden globe to light his path. Now holding the artifact in the crook of his left arm, the false half elf closed on the towering skeleton. The wind tore through the graveyard and the icy ground crunched under his boots. A long, lingering moan sent a chill of a different type down his spine. He paused, the floating globe moving by his will in the direction of the terrible cry. Seeing nothing, Kalec took a step toward the sound. After a moment, he finally realized that the moan was the wind blowing through the eye socket of the gargantuan creature's skull. A new shiver ran through Kalec as he recalled his vision of the living Galakrond. That such a being had lived, a proto-dragon that dwarfed dragons, filled him with awe. Galakrond was legend, but to see the legend living . . . But then disturbing thoughts arose. Kalec wondered what place Galakrond had in this madness. The one vision appeared to have focused on him. Kalec vowed that once he had finished with the foul thing resting in his arm, he would still try to find out more from one of his former counterparts. The blue had little else to do anymore. Seeing the area from a much lower perspective, Kalec noticed things that he had not before. In the glow, he noted footprints. It had never occurred to him that this sacred place had been visited by other creatures. Some of the prints were large, although not as large as those of dragons. The round, blunt shape indicated the presence of magnataur-huge, savage hunters whose lower half
resembled the body of a woolly mammoth, while the upper torso was like some bestial version of a night elf or human with giant tusks. Why the magnataur had been hunting in the wastes was a question that was not satisfactorily answered by the smaller, hooved tracks Kalec noted. At least two of the bison-like taunka had also been through the area, which was situated fairly far from their home territory. The taunka were also more civilized than magnataur and had a great respect for the dead, which made their being here more curious. Something long and thin lay at the edge of the globe's illumination. Directing the globe closer, Kalec saw that it was a magnataur spear. The tip, partially visible, was stained with blood, and the blue noticed that some of the ice close to the point was dark. The magnataur had brought down its prey, but there was no sign of the body. Kalec supposed that the beasts had taken away the unfortunate taunka's corpse for food. With disgust, Kalec turned back to the rib cage. He stepped up to the nearest of the high, arcing bones and, after a hesitation, stepped within the Father of Dragons. The moment he did, Kalec sensed that he was not alone. He quickly sent the globe forward. A thickly furred female taunka stood under the arch of another rib. She leaned on a primitive spear made of some long bone and tipped with a rock honed sharp. "Hail to you, dragon," the white, bison-headed hunter rumbled as she bowed. She was clad in simple leather garments which she had no doubt fashioned from her own kills. "I am Buniq. I did not mean any sacrilege here." That she had seen him transform despite the darkness did not surprise Kalec. In a land where it was often as dark as night even in the day, a good taunka hunter had to have fair night vision. "I've no quarrel with you, Buniq," the blue returned. He kept the artifact as well hidden by his arm as possible, even subtly shifting the glowing orb so that it slightly blinded the taunka. She raised her other hand to shield her eyes. "Nor I with you. My kind do not come here often, but I was in search of a relic from this place to bring back and thus prove myself worthy of him who loves me."
Kalec held his surprise at her reason for being here, but assumed she could not possibly be hunting what he carried. Growing impatient to finish burying the foul thing, he curtly replied, "I will not stop you from going on with your search, then." "This ground is as sacred to us as it is to you," the taunka went on, as if not hearing him. "The magnataur, they care nothing about anything. They seek only to fill their stomachs." Lowering her hand, Buniq took a step toward him. "But for as long as there have been taunka, we have respected the resting place of the great ones." "And I am pleased to hear that, but-" She set the butt of the spear on the ground again . . . right next to the very hole to which Kalec was heading. "A world without dragons, that would be a strange place. Not so good. There would be no . . . harmony. The world is hard enough to survive. The world needs dragons." Kalec chose not to comment on the adverse effect Deathwing and Malygos had had on Azeroth. Instead, he sought some other way in which to hint to the overly talkative taunka that she should depart. Suddenly, he noticed that Buniq was no longer standing before him. Kalec spun . . . and discovered her near the rib by which he had just passed. The blue could not recall her walking past him, but Buniq, her back now to him, clearly must have. The sphere illuminated several of her steps in the chilling ground. As if sensing him watching, she looked back. The taunka's large brown eyes focused not on Kalec, but rather on the crook of his arm. "Some things should not remain buried," Buniq quietly commented. "Fare you well, great dragon." Somehow, Kalec's hold on the relic slipped. Looking down, he seized it before it could fall free. Straightening again, he demanded, "What do you mean by-" But Buniq was nowhere in view. Directing the sphere toward where he had last seen her, Kalec could not even find any trace of the tracks he had seen a moment ago. The blue stepped back. He refused to think that the taunka had been some figment of his imagination. What he suspected was that the foul artifact had
once more toyed with him. Kalec focused on reburying the relic and leaving its madness behind. He started to set it back into the hole . . . then, in the light of the sphere, he noticed something where Buniq had momentarily set her spear. A hand. The blue swore. Despite where it lay, the hand was almost entirely intact. And though it was of similar appearance, the lost appendage was clearly larger than that of a human or a dwarf. It had a peculiar gray coloring that also unsettled Kalec. However, after a closer study, what he had thought flesh proved to be the remnants of a glove. How he had missed the hand last time, Kalec discovered quickly. A chunk of frosty ground had covered it until Buniq's spear had loosened the dirt. The blue glanced over his shoulder, almost certain that she would be standing there, but of the taunka there remained no sign. Despite the grisly find, Kalec nearly dismissed it until he saw that there was something else caught in the palm. It was small, round, and at first appeared to be glass. However, when Kalec dared touch it, he felt an odd warmth. The octagonal artifact began to glow blue. Blue, not lavender. With an even stronger epithet, Kalec stumbled back. What this meant now he did not know. The relic fell from his arm, landing atop the gloved hand- The world flashed blindingly bright. "This is not true," said a voice Kalec recognized as a young Ysera's. "They are wrong. . . ." "He is not very smart," Malygos's voice returned. "But smart enough. . . ." Suddenly, Kalec could see again . . . and what he saw was another shriveled proto-dragon corpse. This one had once been ivory, but now looked dusty white. Like the previous one, the face was contorted, as if the death had been agonizing. Malygos's gaze swept past Ysera and a briefly viewed fire-orange figure that Kalec assumed was her sister to another location a little farther off. There, a second corpse lay sprawled. This one still retained some of the icy-blue coloring that marked it as one of Malygos's own. And apparently a proto-dragon Malygos knew. Various emotions played out, including those attached to memories of younger days. A name-Tarys-came to Kalec's mind. As juveniles, Malygos and Tarys had hunted together while
learning the proper tactics. Kalec noticed that he felt his host's emotions more clearly than ever. There was some change in the vision, some new vividness, as if Kalec were now even more a part of it than ever. It was not a thought that, under the current circumstances, comforted him. Malygos's thoughts came as both words and images. There were tales being told, unthinkable tales. Malygos did not know what to make of them. Ysera thought them false, while Alexstrasza believed that they should at least be considered. Galakrond had supposedly slain these and at least a dozen others. The source of this discovery huddled next to Alexstrasza, somehow managing to look smaller than Ysera despite that not being the case. Purple in color, he looked half-dead himself. "Swallowed them up! Swallowed them up!" he repeated over and over. "These are not swallowed," Ysera pointed out, still showing her disbelief. "Galakrond not like them?" "Swallowed them up!" Ysera scowled. The purple cowered more. Her tone reassuring, Alexstrasza murmured something in his ear. The scowl's focus shifted to Ysera's sister, but Alexstrasza pointedly ignored it. From his host, Kalec understood that the sisters had come across this shell of a proto-dragon and, after listening to what Malygos secretly half-considered babbling from the purple, had gone in search of the icy-blue male. Malygos did not know exactly why they had decided to come to him save that he was very clever. Trying to find a way to continue to be clever to them, he eyed the corpses. "More around?" "More . . . yesss . . . more!" The purple male glanced nervously to the west, to where the land first rose to a high ridge, then dropped some distance. The party had come from the east and so had had only a glancing view of that direction. Malygos had been to the area before-the hunting for grazers was excellent here during the spring-and remembered only that there was a river below, knowledge that certainly was irrelevant to the moment. Not sure what he expected to find, Malygos headed in that direction. Kalec
was also curious and glad that his mind and that of the proto-dragon seemed so in sync. Kalec observed everything that passed his host's gaze and suddenly noticed some marks in the dirt that looked as if a creature the size of Malygos had dragged itself toward the ridge. His host did not see what he did, at least not at first. Only when he had just reached the top of the ridge did Malygos abruptly turn and eye the trail with interest. He leaned over the tracks, sniffing them. A peculiar stench-yet one not all that unfamiliar to either-filled his nostrils. On the other side of the ridge, rocks clattered. Malygos whirled. The dreadful vision that Kalec had experienced in the Nexus rose up over the ridge to attack his host. The rotting flesh, the sunken white eyes . . . even having seen the fiend before did not keep Kalec from wanting to pull back. But Malygos threw himself toward the monstrosity, exhaling at the same time. His frosty breath enveloped the undead proto-dragon, freezing it. But for only a second. Barely slowing, the shriveled corpse shook off the frost and continued its attack. The stench of decomposing meat sickened both Kalec and his host as they collided with the ghoulish creature. Yellowed fangs sought Malygos's throat. Claws tore at his chest. Up close, the undead proto-dragon's countenance was even more awful, much of the skin having at some point been scorched. The scorched areas, more sensitive to decay, had crumbled inward in many places, giving Malygos and Kalec a view of the bloody, ruined interior of their foe's head. As Malygos inhaled for a second attempt, the undead startled him by doing just the opposite. A putrid green cloud covered Malygos's head, filling his mouth and snout and burning into his eyes. Nausea overcame him and, as a result, also Kalec. To both, it felt as if their insides were putrefying. Malygos weakened, falling to his front knees. A tremendous whooshing sound, followed by intense heat, jarred Kalec and his host to full consciousness again. Claws pulled Malygos back from the heat. His eyes cleared enough to give both a watery glimpse at what had happened. Alexstrasza stood before their ghoulish foe, exhaling more fire on the undead proto-dragon. The creature burned well, but still did not fall. It converged on the fire-orange female. "Let go!" Malygos commanded Ysera, who was the one who had pulled him
to safety. She obeyed immediately. Although still reeling from the undead's ghastly breath weapon, Malygos knew that he had to help Alexstrasza in turn. Malygos exhaled forcefully. It made his head swim and even Kalec thought they were about to black out, but somehow Malygos retained his sense of mind as his chilling breath joined the female's own strike. More brittle now due to the flames, the undead proto-dragon cracked and crumbled with the additional and opposing force turned on it. A wing already fragmented broke off, followed by one forelimb. The fiend pressed forward, only to lose its tail and a hind paw. The corpse collapsed, shattering as it hit the hard ground. Alexstrasza looked in relief to Malygos, but Kalec's host had already spun around in Ysera's direction. Kalec at first thought Malygos had gone mad, but then sensed what concerned him. Malygos fluttered up into the air just long enough to pass over Ysera. Of the cowering proto-dragon, there was no sign, and both Malygos and Kalec assumed that he had wisely fled. Still, he was not Malygos's target . . . that was the first corpse upon which they had come. A corpse that Kalec saw was beginning to move. The icy-blue proto-dragon fell upon the stirring body. To Kalec's dismay, his host sank his teeth deep into the corpse's throat. Malygos ripped away flesh and bone with abandon even as the body tried to shake free. With one last vicious tug, Malygos tore off the upper part of the neck. The head flailed, the jaws seeking the living proto-dragon's own throat. Malygos twisted around, then released his hold. The severed head spiraled through the air, then landed yards away. Its jaws clacked several times before the head finally lay still. The body quieted a moment later. Malygos shook the foul-tasting bits out of his mouth and turned toward the remaining corpse. But Alexstrasza and Ysera had already torn that one to shreds. "It did not move," Ysera said after also shaking rotting flesh free. "We did not want it to." Malygos nodded, but then saw a troubling expression on Alexstrasza's face. She studied the landscape, then looked at the others. "More dead, he said," the fire-orange female reminded them. "Where are
they?" There came a plaintive cry from far away, one that made the unseen Kalec think of the cowering proto-dragon. Malygos instantly turned- And Kalec found himself not only back in his own time, but once again a dragon. In addition, he was flying through the night sky, the artifact and the round, glassy fragment both clutched tight. The second piece lay attached to the top of the octagonal artifact, revealing that both had been one from the beginning and had merely been separated by time and circumstance . . . until now. Yet, that did not bother the blue nearly as much as discovering his body acting on what he considered its own accord or as if another mind controlled it. Kalec halted, hovering over the dark landscape-some of the jagged mountains of Northrend on the edge of the Dragonblight, he belatedly noted-and trying to decide what he could do. One desperate hope quickly came to mind. If I can't bury it, maybe I can just let it-them-shatter! Without hesitation, Kalec released his hold. The combined relics plummeted toward the hungry mountains. A sense of foreboding suddenly filled the blue. He dived after the relics. Far below, their illumination swelled- Kalec roared in protest even as he felt himself lose connection with the waking world to which he had only just returned. He had one last glimpse of the sharp, rocky land racing up at him before plunging into the darkness within again. For a single heartbeat, there was utter silence. Then, the voices rose from the darkness. They quickly grew from whispers to a manic cacophony that threatened to deafen the blue. The voices turned into frantic cries. The world burst into focus again. Shrieking proto-dragons darted through the cloudy sky. A thundering roar shook the warmer but still mountainous region Kalec now found himself-or rather, Malygos-in. Something suddenly blotted out what light there was. Malygos looked up-and both Kalec and he beheld the underside of a titanic proto-dragon that could be none other than Galakrond.
Kalec felt the fear that touched Malygos, but it was fear combined with a determination to live. Fear was no thing of shame, not when confronted by such a horrific threat. Malygos retained his focus, diving down toward a crevice just as Galakrond fell upon a silver-blue proto-dragon too panicked to choose one direction over another fast enough to evade the much swifter behemoth. To Kalec's horror, Galakrond swallowed the smaller proto-dragon whole. Only then did Kalec notice something even more disconcerting about the Father of Dragons. Galakrond's body seemed distended in odd places, especially his gullet. What's happened here? Why is he doing this? Kalec wondered. But there was no chance to seek an answer through Malygos, for just then something collided with Kalec's host. Unprepared, Malygos flapped wildly as he sought to regain control. Through his eyes, Kalec briefly noted Coros hovering near the area before Malygos's spinning took the sneering proto-dragon from view. The blue-and-white proto-dragon's fury infected Kalec as well, and as Malygos righted himself, Kalec looked forward to seeing his host deal with his rival. Yet, before Malygos could act, a dread shadow enshrouded him. The protodragon looked up . . . directly into the vast gullet of Galakrond. The jaws closed on Malygos. Malygos . . . and Kalec.

ONE THE NEXUS TOUCHED
The hot, malodorous breath nearly overwhelmed Kalec and his host as the jaws closed. Kalec wondered if perhaps it would be best for Malygos to let the stench knock them out so that they would not feel the monstrous teeth crush through their shared flesh and bone. A violent, steaming burst of wind suddenly threw Malygos back. The burst was accompanied by an odd muffled thunder. At the same time, Galakrond's maw opened wide again, enabling Malygos to tumble to freedom. Finally out of range, the blue-and-white proto-dragon frantically righted himself. As he did, both he and Kalec saw the source of Malygos's salvation. With a defiant laugh, Neltharion darted away from under Galakrond's throat. Galakrond hacked, creating another powerful explosion of wind that forced back not only Malygos but also other proto-dragons in its path. Neltharion had struck at the weakest point just at the right moment, an attack that Kalec would have thought foolhardy at the best of times. Even while regaining his breath, Galakrond had the cunning and fury to snatch at his tiny attacker as the charcoal-gray proto-dragon dived. Claws as large as Neltharion closed on him, but at the last second, a fearsome blast of what appeared to Kalec to be sand half-blinded Galakrond. A dust-brown male veered off. Galakrond shook his head to clear his vision, enabling his prey to make good their escape. Neltharion flew directly toward Malygos. "Fly or die!" It was good advice to both Kalec and Malygos. But as Malygos turned, Galakrond's roar arose from behind them. The roar was accompanied by a swooshing sound and punctuated by a heavy thud and Neltharion's pained grunt. Peering over his shoulder, Malygos saw that where the titanic monster's claws had missed, Galakrond's long, thick tail had not. Several times the length of Galakrond's hind limb, it easily caught Neltharion on the side, striking him hard.
Stunned, the gray male spiraled toward the harsh ground below. Perhaps Galakrond intended to pursue, but a panicked yellow female chose that moment to pass near enough in the gigantic proto-dragon's field of vision to attract his attention. With an eager roar, the hungry behemoth gave chase. Unheedful of this stroke of luck, Malygos had already dived after Neltharion. The other male had endangered himself to save Malygos, and Kalec saw without surprise that his host could do no less. The blue-and-white protodragon stretched hard to reach the plummeting figure, but even as swift as he was, it was clear to Malygos and Kalec that there would be no catching Neltharion before the gray struck the ground. A fire-orange form rose from below, colliding with the stunned male. Alexstrasza grunted hard as she and the bulkier Neltharion hit, but somehow the female managed to maintain control. For a few vital seconds, she stopped Neltharion's fatal descent, just long enough for Malygos to reach the pair. Without a word, he gripped Neltharion by the shoulders, hefting the larger male up and relieving Alexstrasza of her burden. She, in turn, rose and assisted him with carrying Neltharion away from the vicinity. Through Malygos, Kalec observed the area and found it astonishingly devoid of blood and torn flesh. He realized that Galakrond had swallowed nearly all of his victims whole. In some ways, the blue found that even more horrific, imagining how those proto-dragons had felt as they vanished in the behemoth's gullet. "So many . . ." Alexstrasza gasped as they flew. "So many . . ." Malygos said nothing, but his thoughts mirrored her words. Kalec's host was just as shocked by events as she was. A new sound rumbled through the area, a sound so odd, so unnerving, that the two proto-dragons nearly lost their grip on Neltharion. The sound grew more intense, more guttural-and because of that, more terrifying. Kalec still had no idea what it could be, but Malygos at last identified it with something from his own experience. Images flashed through Kalec's mind, images of his host regurgitating bits of bone or other inedible parts of various prey. Somewhere, Kalec understood with growing sickness, Galakrond was doing something akin to that, only what he was disgorging was not the remnants of
any buffalo or fish- Kalec's world suddenly swam again. His consciousness was torn from Malygos. Visions of Galakrond feasting ran through Kalec's thoughts, and then the accursed darkness overtook the blue. Yet, once more, a familiar voice called him from that darkness. Kalec . . . Kalec? Why Jaina called him this time, the dragon did not know, but with what sense he already had, Kalec blocked his thoughts from her notice. Even as he did that, he felt the world around him return. A harsh wind struck his face. Kalec instinctively shifted position and discovered himself slipping. At last able to open his eyes, the blue watched a rocky ridge slide up over him. Kalec realized that he was falling. With one paw, he dug his claws into the dirt and stone, managing to slow his descent but not to stop it. Kalec tried to use his other paw, but it remained tightly shut despite his desperate need. He toppled backward, finding out then that it was not a ridge from which he had slipped but a mountain. Kalec sought to right himself, only to have one wing clip the mountainside and send him tumbling faster. Below the blue, jagged rocks that reminded him too much of Galakrond's teeth shot toward him. Managing to focus, Kalec cast a spell. His wild descent slowed nearly to a halt. It was a very short-term solution, but he hoped that he would not need more than a few moments. Catching his breath, the blue dragon rolled onto his stomach. Already feeling the hastily cast spell dissipating, Kalec flapped hard. As he regained flight, his spell faded away. The blue dragon alighted on another mountain. There was no continued call from Jaina. He hoped that she had given up. Either way, Kalec had only one interest now, and that was the foul thing still gripped in his paw. The nowcomplete artifact seemed to taunt him with its persistent glow. There was, naturally, no point in throwing it away. It would somehow return to plague him. He also doubted the wisdom of attempting to destroy it again. Kalec let the wind clear his head as he struggled to decide what to do next. If not for Jaina's voice, the blue would not have even been certain that he was in his own time and in his own body. It was becoming harder to separate reality from vision.
After several fruitless minutes of ruminating, Kalec launched himself toward the Nexus. Each moment of flight was nerve-wracking, with the blue expecting to be pulled back into the visions at the worst possible opportunity. When he had to fly over water, Kalec paid special attention to his protective spells. But to his relief and astonishment, the artifact permitted him to reach the Nexus unhindered. Kalec decided to try to focus on something other than the object of his nightmares. The Nexus's collection had to be organized, even if he had initially made the suggestion as an excuse, not because he'd had any true desire to take on the task. But he realized that before he could begin on the collection, he had to work on strengthening the wards. There was no chance that they would remain strong enough to protect the Nexus and its contents for very much longer unless he attended to them now. He changed to his humanoid form, at the moment feeling oddly more comfortable in it than in his true one. Kalec summoned a simple marble stand with a fluted column and cautiously set the artifact atop the waist-high platform, then turned his attention to the wards. Shutting his eyes, he concentrated. Even with his eyes closed, the blue dragon could see the world around him, but it was a world crisscrossed with a variety of multicolored ley lines. All of Azeroth was draped in this complex arrangement of lines of magical energy, but those he currently viewed served a specific purpose. They powered the various wards that acted as the Nexus's protection. Following along the ley lines, he began to inspect each ward carefully. Kalec quickly saw the weakest of the wards. He put forth a hand, which in this world view glowed with lavender energy, and gestured at the ley line needed. With his other hand, he drew from another of Azeroth's ley lines and linked the two where the core of the first lay exposed- But before he could do more, the Nexus itself began to shimmer. Dismissing his spellwork, Kalec opened his eyes and immediately looked to the artifact. Not at all to his surprise, it had taken on a different glow, this one matching the array of magical colors associated with the immense forces in and around the Nexus. The stronger the relic's glow, the less intense was that of Kalec's surroundings.
That the artifact could have any effect on the Nexus stunned Kalec. It had done little when he had last brought it here, but then, the artifact had not been whole before. The missing piece had not only magnified the whole artifact's abilities but also possibly even stirred up others formerly dormant. Kalec grabbed the artifact and transformed. Planting it against his chest, the former Aspect fled through the Nexus as quickly as he could. The energies of the Nexus continued to fluctuate as he raced through tunnel after tunnel, until at last he reached the exit. Once outside, Kalec soared high into the sky. Below him, he could make out the entirety of the Nexus. The dragon sensed the various energies in play in a manner with which he was entirely unfamiliar. Kalec-who should have understood better than most the nature of such magical manipulation-could not fathom with what intent it was done. The rich colors normally reserved for the Nexus's forces now radiated strongly from the artifact. As for the Nexus, it abruptly flared bright again, so much so that the blue dragon was forced to look away or be blinded. And then the intense stirring of magical energy subsided. What Kalec expected to see when he glanced back at the Nexus, he could not say. What he did see both perplexed and surprised him. The Nexus looked and felt to him exactly as it had before. With a wary hiss, the dragon circled his sanctum once, seeking any change, however subtle. Despite his best efforts, Kalec still found no difference. "All that could hardly be for nothing," he muttered to the infuriating object in his grip. "What did you do?" The relic, its glow once more normal, gave no clue. Snorting, the dragon dived back down to the gap through which he had emerged. As he entered, his gaze immediately went to the artifact. However, there was no change in the glow. Kalec returned to his chambers, expecting each moment that the foul thing would begin anew to wreak havoc. That there was no visible sign of it doing so did not assuage his fears in the least. While Kalec was aware that he might only be feeling paranoid, there was still the chance that the artifact might be up to something even while apparently quiescent.
Determined more than ever to find some other relic that might help him combat the effects of the one he held, Kalec summoned forth an ancient piece in which he had particular hope. An oval crystal of a deep aquamarine hue and the size of his paw materialized in the air before him. Kalec was not certain of all its properties, but some of the knowledge that had been passed on to him gave him the impression that it might nullify the magic of the octagonal relic. But the moment he touched the crystal, its rich hue faded. Kalec quickly probed the artifact. It was utterly devoid of any trace of magical energy. A curse that mixed well the best-or worst-of dragon, human, and dwarf escaped the blue's mouth. Enraged at this latest, so swift defeat, Kalec threw the octagonal antiquity without care about what might happen. It flew with tremendous speed toward the wall, then came to a halt barely an inch from possible destruction. From there, it descended to the floor without even a sound. The dragon roared. Unable to stop himself, Kalec unleashed a barrage of spells upon the relic. Fire sought to consume the piece. Bolts of arcane energy assailed it. A lance of ice attempted to pierce its surface. Lightning blasted it. And none of the attacks left the slightest scar upon it. His breathing ragged from the strain of his efforts, Kalec slumped. The artifact continued to glow faintly, again seeming to mock him. The blue dragon brooded for a while, then suddenly stiffened. Perhaps . . . perhaps I have been going about this the wrong way. Kalec had never really tried to understand the artifact. From the start, he had seen it only as something evil. Yet now he wondered what purpose there could possibly be in driving him mad. Approaching the artifact, the dragon studied every bit of the exterior that he could see without touching it, but he noticed no change. Another probe with his powers also yielded nothing new. Still, Kalec was not satisfied. The artifact could even at this moment be in the midst of some preplanned spellwork that his acute senses could not detect. It had already proved itself capable of acting upon him without his noticing. He focused on the small addition he had found during his second excursion to the skeleton. Simple as it appeared, it was obviously an integral part of the
overall relic. Thus far, it seemed to him that it had magnified the original effect, but he believed it also did more. A slight gleam in the center of the smaller piece caught his attention. The dragon squinted. A young human woman with long blond hair stood before him, a woman he knew too well. There was an innocence about her, an innocence that drew him as much as her beauty. "Anveena . . ." The blue dragon gasped. He reached a paw to her, only to have it go through her own extended hand. Suddenly, Kalec stood in a forest. He was no longer a dragon but, rather, a half-elven figure. It was the same form in which Kalec had first met Anveena. Kalec . . . Anveena faintly called, her outline becoming more faded and distant. She continued to extend her hand toward him, as if beckoning him to join her. Kalec . . . He was jolted. The second calling of his name had not been done by Anveena but by Jaina. It was enough to bring him back to consciousness. Kalec wrenched himself away from the artifact. He was covered in sweat. He also noticed that, as in the dream, he had hands, not paws. At some point, Kalec had changed shape without even noticing it. At that moment, Kalec felt the presence of another blue dragon. Somehow, the knowledge that he was no longer alone in the Nexus enabled him to pull himself together. Whirling away from the artifact, Kalec left the chamber to see who had returned and why. It was not until he was nearly at one of the entrances that he saw movement. Kalec marched toward the newcomer without saying a word. The smaller blue dragon-a female-had her back toward him. Kalec hesitated. "Tyri?" The female turned, but she was not the one he had thought her to be. The former Aspect silently berated himself for expecting to see the female blue to whom he had once been promised. The blue before him stared at Kalec as if seeing an orc. He recalled his transformation; although they were creatures of magic, blues generally retained their dragon forms when in the Nexus.
"Spell-Weaver," she finally acknowledged. "I thought you were away." This time ignoring the use of a title no longer his, Kalec resumed his draconic shape. Now peering down on her, Kalec could not help blurting, "And you hoped to be about your business and depart before I returned?" She looked as aghast as a dragon could. "No . . . no, Spell-Weaver! In truth, I am pleased you are here. I wanted to tell you of an anomaly I sensed near the Dragonblight recently, very near Wyrmrest Temple-" Kalec knew immediately that she referred to the artifact's stirring. "I know of it. There's nothing to concern yourself about." The female looked slightly embarrassed. "I should have known that you would be aware of it." That should have been the end of it, but the other blue dragon simply remained where she was, looking vastly uncomfortable. Kalec made an assumption about what ran through her mind. "I am grateful for your concern. You were on your way somewhere else, though, weren't you?" "Yes. I thought I would explore-" He let her get no further. "Then, by all means, you should continue on. Again, you have my thanks for coming back to give warning." She gave him another uncomfortable look, then, bowing her head, departed. Kalec paused in thought for a moment and turned from the entrance-just in time to catch a glimpse of a shadowed figure the size of a night elf or a tall human in the darkened passage from which he had only just come. The dragon surged forward, moving with more than enough swiftness to catch up with any intruder. However, even though he reached an area where the long passage would have prevented anyone from hiding or escaping into a side tunnel, there was no one. Kalec probed the area with magic, but there was definitely no trace of another. Only as that knowledge sank in did the blue also see better in his mind just what that intruder had looked like beyond his mere height. The image that formed made Kalec certain that his sanity was indeed crumbling, and crumbling fast. It was the same cloaked and hooded figure from the visions.
TWO THE GATHERING
Kalec did not try to deny what he had seen. It had been either the product of his overstressed imagination or some new facet of the artifact's magic. Neither was a pleasant alternative. The first was an indication of just how unstable he might already be; if it was the second, it meant that the accursed object likely had some new game it wished to play with him. He chose to consider it the latter and immediately raced back to where he had left the relic. Unfortunately, the darkness caught him first, sending the blue tumbling against the passage walls. As great fragments of stone showered Kalec, the dragon-already barely conscious-pitched forward halfway to his sanctum. But even before his body struck the floor, his mind found itself soaring in the sky. Kalec was once again a part of Malygos, but this was a Malygos much more subdued, much more driven. In the distance, a thundering roar that could only have erupted from the jaws of Galakrond shook Kalec and his host. Fortunately, as the roar trailed off, its fading made it evident that the gargantuan proto-dragon was headed in a different direction. Malygos pushed on, his thoughts so buried by his urgency that Kalec had trouble ferreting anything out. Kalec saw glimpses of Alexstrasza and Ysera, a handful of proto-dragons of the same family as Malygos, and flashes of Neltharion fighting something that was too small to be Galakrond. After much delving, Kalec discovered that at least one of the memories involved Malygos staving off an undead proto-dragon with faded red coloring. Kalec remembered the earlier struggle and knew that there had been no red proto-dragon other than Alexstrasza. For a moment, he feared that she had perished at some point and risen as an undead, as other corpses had, but then he realized that could obviously not be the case. Yet . . . even if the undead proto-dragon had not been Alexstrasza, it still meant that once again, the dead had risen. Kalec did not know why, but he was
certain that somehow the answer would be found with Galakrond. It was something, he sensed a moment later, that Malygos also believed. Indeed, Kalec finally learned that Malygos had only just fled-fled-from the undead. There had been more than the one. There had been seven. Worse, Malygos had not been alone. He had been accompanied by two of his protodragon family. They had not escaped. Guilt washed over Malygos, and Kalec understood that he felt he should have stayed. Yet it was clear from what glimpses Kalec had of his host's memories that Malygos had only fled after the other two had been lost already. Curiously-and most worryingly to Kalec-his host had blocked out all thought of just how the other two had perished. There was no sign of any other proto-dragon along Malygos's path. While that meant little to Kalec at first, he gradually sensed Malygos's concern about this point. It was with relief to both that another winged figure came into view a few minutes later. Neltharion still radiated a bit of his bluster, but even he watched the air around them with the utmost caution. "Friend Malygos! Ha! You did come! We survive! We are fighters!" Despite his bravado, Neltharion's tone hinted at relief that Malygos still lived. Kalec wondered how many others had not survived. What is going on here? Kalec asked, although, of course, no one could hear him. Dragon legend said nothing of this evidently critical time period for the proto-dragons. The age of the dragons had yet to come, but with Malygos and the other future Aspects alive, that shift from proto-dragon to dragon dominance had to be imminent. Yet what Kalec had witnessed thus far pointed toward extinction for all. Even a true dragon could not stand against a horror like Galakrond. "The others?" queried Malygos. "The fire one, she is well. The little sister, she barks much." Neltharion paused, then less brashly added, "Zorix . . . he was taken." In Malygos's mind, there appeared the image of a male proto-dragon with darting eyes and a shining golden hide. Even though Kalec had not seen this male before, both Malygos and Neltharion apparently had known him for part
of whatever period of time had passed since the last vision. His loss disturbed the blue's host immensely. "Talonixa speaks as him. Talonixa speaks too well as him." Of this Talonixa, Kalec only sensed that she had been Zorix's mate and was a female proto-dragon of strong will. Among those proto-dragons who had made the sudden leap to intelligence, she was evidently considered one of the most cunning. But for all that apparent cunning, Kalec's host did not have the greatest trust in Talonixa. It had nothing to do with her being a female-Alexstrasza's quick wits and courage had already raised her high in Malygos's eyes-but he considered other aspects of her manner dangerous. More, Kalec could not divine at the moment. Neltharion's eyes narrowed. He looked past Malygos. The other protodragon quickly followed his companion's gaze but saw only empty sky. The gray male exhaled. "Nothing. Not him. Not them." A shudder ran through Malygos, but Kalec's host blocked out all thought of what caused it. "The others gather?" "Yes. Follow." Both proto-dragons flew hard and fast, as if Galakrond himself snapped at their tails. Kalec became caught up in their urgency even though he knew only half of what was happening, at most. Malygos continually glanced around, often focusing on the ground far below. Gradually, Kalec understood what bothered Malygos about the landscape. It was devoid of any visible animal life except for a few birds. No large beasts roamed any of the places over which the proto-dragons flew. Eyeing Neltharion, Malygos asked, "We are close?" "More to fly. Other roost fell." It took Kalec a moment to decipher the last. Whatever previous site the proto-dragons had chosen to gather at had become too dangerous. They had been forced to move farther on. A rumble from some distance behind stirred up both flyers. The gray protodragon glanced back. Malygos instinctively followed suit. There was no sign of Galakrond, but even Kalec was aware that the gigantic fiend could cover tremendous distances in the blink of an eye.
Hissing in frustration, Malygos started to turn his gaze back to the path ahead. Four winged forms coming from the north caught his attention. Eyes narrowed, Malygos studied the oncoming proto-dragons. "Others," he warned Neltharion. His companion stared at the newcomers. "No one is north. North is bad." Malygos hissed again. "Yes . . ." The four proto-dragons drew near enough for some details to become evident. To Kalec's relief, though, they were not what he expected. These were living, breathing proto-dragons. But Malygos was not at all pleased, and Kalec quickly saw why. At the head of the formation flew a familiar blue-green proto-dragon. Coros. Kalec also recognized one of the others who had joined in the first attack on Malygos. With a sneer at the four, Neltharion rumbled, "This fight, I like." To both the gray's and Kalec's surprise, Malygos shook his head. "We fight the not-living. We fight Galakrond. Not one another." "Hmmph! Coros know that?" The other proto-dragons slowed as they approached the pair. Coros surveyed Malygos and Neltharion. "You live. Good!" "Yes," returned Kalec's host calmly. "We live, and that is good. Coros also lives . . . and that is good, too. No fights between us. Fight only Galakrond, yes?" Malygos's rival dipped his head as if taking the sentiment to heart. The sly grin ever remained in place, though. Both knew that only the dire circumstances kept them from concluding their bloody feud. "The north is not good!" interjected an impatient Neltharion. He looked disappointed that there would not be a fight. "Coros should not be north." "We scout. Talonixa asked." "Talonixa?" Malygos repeated with some trepidation. "Why?" "Talonixa plans!" The icy-blue male refrained from snorting, although it took a struggle to do so. Kalec felt Malygos's growing concern over the female's overwhelming command of the other proto-dragons. Talonixa's kind were headstrong, impulsive, but also dominating. It was not a combination for which either Malygos or Kalec cared, especially now.
"The north," Malygos finally said. "Danger?" To Kalec, who could do nothing but observe, the grin only grew slyer. "No danger. Coros too clever for stupid not-living." This was not the first time Kalec had heard the unsettling term used, and despite his own predicament, that concerned him. How many of those moving corpses are there? How many? More important, Kalec wondered just how they had come into being. In his own time, he lived in a world where, with the exception of the Forsaken-who had sworn their allegiance to the Horde-the undead were a not-uncommon menace, destroyed on sight whenever possible. Yet in such an early era in Azeroth's history, he had hardly expected to hear of such horrors. "Too much talk!" Neltharion growled. "We all go!" Coros did not argue, instead immediately veering past the duo. His comrades, all of the same family, followed without any further glance at the gray or Malygos. "We fly faster?" Neltharion quietly asked Kalec's host. Malygos nodded. "Yes. Faster." And with that, they shot past a startled Coros and the rest. As Malygos pushed, he and Kalec heard Coros's angry hiss. Kalec was not at all surprised to see that proto-dragons shared more than one trait with dragons. Among dragons, racing had always been a popular competition. Malygos peered over his shoulder to see Coros and the others trying their best to catch up. However, Malygos and Neltharion set an astounding pace. Kalec could scarcely believe his host still had such strength, then sensed that Malygos had embraced the suggestion not only because of his disdain for Coros but also so that for a short time, the blue-and-white male could focus less on the horrors unleashed upon his world. Despite the strain, Malygos continued to fly right alongside Neltharion and several lengths ahead of his rival. Try as he might, Coros could not catch up, although he did soon leave his other companions far behind. It occurred to Kalec, only too late, that spread out as they were, the six proto-dragons made a much more visible target, but fortunately, nothing happened. Still, he felt Malygos also relieved to arrive finally at a bowl-shaped
valley where in the shadows it soon became apparent that scores upon scores of proto-dragons warily gathered. The valley echoed with hisses as the newcomers descended, but not all of the reactions focused on the arrivals. There were members of nearly every protodragon family of which Malygos was aware, plus a few that Kalec's host did not recognize. Many were not by nature or by attitude on friendly terms with one another. Only the disaster sweeping over their world forced them now at least to pretend to be allies. The tension was also magnified by the presence of many of the lesser-as Malygos thought them-proto-dragons, those that were essentially little more than animals. They had to be constantly herded or guarded by their more intelligent brethren. For Kalec, it set into stark relief the curious rise of those of Malygos's generation. A throaty, harsh hiss rose above the din. It cut off the rest. Malygos followed the hiss to its source. Talonixa dominated not only in voice but also in size and presence. She was a third again as large as most of the males, only a few, such as Neltharion, outweighing her. Her smooth hide glittered gold even under the overcast sky. Talonixa had sharp, gleaming black eyes that, when fixed upon individual protodragons, subdued even the most restive. Malygos and Neltharion moved to where Alexstrasza and Ysera perched. Unlike many of the other proto-dragons, the sisters had kept to themselves and not their family. Some of Malygos's family stared at his choice of companions, but there seemed no surprise on the part of Neltharion's family that he chose such odd friends. In fact, Kalec thought that its members looked a little relieved not to have to concern themselves with the brash gray. Coros alighted a short distance to Talonixa's left. He was obviously out of breath but did his best to pretend he was as calm as Malygos. "More have come!" Talonixa roared. "We are many! Say it! We are many!" A chorus of proto-dragon voices repeated her litany over and over. Kalec shared Malygos's frustration with the proto-dragons now risking their hiding place as they followed Talonixa's lead. Strength was important, but common sense was something obviously not shared by all. "She talks fighting," Ysera muttered. "Not good. Peace is better."
Although looking as disappointed as her sister, Alexstrasza disagreed. "We must fight . . . but not fight like Talonixa." "We fight . . . we die!" As the two females argued, Coros slid up to Talonixa and whispered to her. This snared Malygos's attention. He strained to hear anything but could not. Kalec was also frustrated; he did not trust Coros any more than his host did. Talonixa listened intently, then dismissed Coros with a short hiss. He moved back to his previous position, seeming satisfied with whatever he had passed on to the larger proto-dragon. "North is empty!" she proclaimed. "No not-living! Galakrond's trail is also found!" Most of the other proto-dragons welcomed this news with nods and low hisses. Yet there were several who did not take the information with much pleasure. Malygos radiated a certain satisfaction with this as he studied some of the hesitant ones. He focused on one in particular, but it was Kalec who first recognized the male with the coarse brown hide as the one who had aided both Malygos and Neltharion during the confrontation with Galakrond. The brown male looked particularly perturbed by Talonixa's declarations and the other proto-dragons' willing submission to her. He turned away, only to meet Malygos's gaze. Talonixa spoke again. "We fight soon! We gather more! Find others! There are others! Go! Come again with all when the moons are round!" If the gathering appeared to end abruptly to Kalec, he quickly learned through Malygos that such a coming together of proto-dragons was uncommon in the first place, and it was a sign of both the magnitude of the threat and Talonixa's influence that this many had shown up so soon. Indeed, even despite the danger to all of them, several of the proto-dragons looked relieved to depart. Others went about the task of guiding their bestial brethren away, a scene that once more stirred Kalec's curiosity about the odd transformation overtaking the proto-dragons. A transformation with little future unless they could somehow bring down the voracious behemoth in their midst. Malygos watched with veiled eyes what Coros did. Unlike the others, he remained near Talonixa. As she herself readied to fly, the blue-green male slid
up next to her and spoke. Unwilling to trust his rival's influence on this situation, Malygos started for the pair, only to have Neltharion insert himself between Kalec's host and the duo. "Friend Malygos! That brown! You see him?" Coros glanced their way. The rival male sneered. Talonixa took that moment to fly off. Coros, now bereft of the subject of his attention, did the same a breath later. Hiding his annoyance, Malygos turned his attention to the brown protodragon- The world swam. Kalec briefly slipped into darkness, but if he had hoped that this presaged a return to his own time, his own body, he was sorely disappointed. Malygos flew alone again, the proto-dragon warier than ever. Thanks to images flashing through Malygos's mind, Kalec quickly understood why. The proto-dragon flew over lands to the east, where there had been several sightings of the not-living. However, as with many other things in previous visions, the exact reason why Malygos was scouting on his own was not so apparent. As with the last area the proto-dragon had flown over, the landscape below appeared empty of animal life. However, in this bleak place, neither Kalec nor his host had expected to see many beasts. Still, Kalec gathered that Malygos had seen absolutely nothing. Alighting on a low peak, Malygos peered around. More thoughts crept through Kalec's mind, filling in some missing pieces. Malygos sought the reason for Galakrond's frightful transformation into this hungry fiend terrorizing all, and he sought it very near where the behemoth kept his lair. Kalec questioned the sanity of what Malygos desired but had no choice but to hope that Galakrond was far, far away. Malygos believed that to be the case, but both were aware that there was a chance he was wrong. Malygos's heart pounded from tension as the proto-dragon drew nearer to where the lair was presumed to be. The peaks there were so tall it seemed that they were trying to touch the cloud-enshrouded sun. Such giant mountains would be likely to provide caverns large enough to house a monster the size of Galakrond.
Something below caught Malygos's attention. He dived toward it. At first, Kalec saw only rock, but then he realized that a portion of that rock was of a disquieting and familiar color. The bones had lain there for some time, possibly four or five seasons. Those that were visible indicated a beast as large as many proto-dragons-or, as Malygos discovered after scraping away the earth from one area, it was an actual proto-dragon. This one had perished violently. Many of the bones were cracked, and the partial skull that verified just what lay there had been crushed by a tremendous force. Galakrond, Kalec knew. Here was an early victim. While to him it only served to show just how long Galakrond had been on his murderous rampage, Malygos evidently saw something more in the bones. Although no one had yet witnessed how Galakrond reduced some of his victims to emaciated corpses that would rise as parasitic undead, the evidence of their existence was without question after Malygos's battles. Yet Kalec now wondered, if this was one of the leviathan's prey, why had it not transformed as the others had? Silence reigned about them, but something made Malygos look to his right. To Kalec's observation, there was nothing to see. Even a proto-dragon as courageous as Malygos could not be blamed for being jumpy under such conditions. Returning to the bones, Malygos nudged a few around. With little exception, they revealed that Galakrond had ripped apart and chewed up this unfortunate creature. Malygos's memories of a much smaller but still imposing Galakrond briefly arose, giving Kalec a startling glimpse of how the latter had changed. Galakrond as seen in the earlier stage had looked much more like a normal proto-dragon and not nearly large enough to swallow others whole. His body also had had a smoother, streamlined appearance. His coloring had been more muted, and the eyes had not had that incessant hungering look to them. Malygos continued to ferret around among the bones, seeking clues. It was yet another hint-not that Kalec needed one-of how intricate his host's thinking was compared with that of many of the other proto-dragons.
Somehow, he survived, the disembodied blue thought. Somehow, some of them survived . . . but how? The proto-dragon tensed again. This time, Malygos looked skyward. To the east, a shape already far too massive to be a normal proto-dragon raced toward the mountains-and Malygos's position. The mountains were too far away for Malygos to reach before he would be seen. Kalec's host had no choice but to flatten himself out where he was. His coloring did not blend with the land, but the hope was that Galakrond would not fly near enough to notice. A constant, heavy beat preceded Galakrond, the sound of his vast wings flapping. Malygos knew that with each beat, the gigantic proto-dragon crossed miles. The beat grew louder, closer. Malygos and Kalec knew that Galakrond was almost upon them. But then the beat began to recede. Through narrowed eyes, Malygos watched Galakrond head away from him and toward the mountains. However, just as the icy-blue proto-dragon dared draw a new breath, Galakrond halted. Hovering, the behemoth suddenly began heaving as if choking on something. Neither Malygos nor Kalec paid much mind at first to whatever assailed Galakrond, the giant creature's physical appearance drawing their initial attention. Although it could not have been that long since the vision in which they had previously encountered Galakrond, Kalec was especially stunned by how much more misshapen the fiend had become. Not only was Galakrond oddly distorted, but he now had several growths randomly dotting his body. There were also a number of gray splotches that made it seem as if parts of Galakrond were decaying. But just as Malygos and Kalec came to grips with this new, deformed Galakrond, the monster disgorged what had caused him such distress. Bodies. More than a score of shriveled, limp proto-dragon bodies. They dropped in a horrendous heap to the ground, some flopping about as they struck. Malygos radiated immense distress at the sight, not only because of the awful slaughter but also because among the limp forms, he saw red, brown, gray, and even greenish-yellow bodies. Kalec wished at that moment that he could throw up. In all his life, never had he-who had seen so much horror-witnessed something that struck him
in such a nightmarish manner. He could imagine the final death throes of each and every victim and knew that so many more had perished the same way. He suddenly felt Malygos's further fear upon seeing this grisly image. Alexstrasza, Ysera, and Neltharion were also in the region, and from a distance, Malygos could not tell whether the other three were among the corpses. Even though Kalec knew that all three had survived this era, he could not help but pick up his host's growing worry. With one last purge, Galakrond finished. The gigantic proto-dragon immediately turned away, then took to the air again. As sharp as they were, Malygos's eyes could still not make out any detail on the odd growths marking Galakrond's body. Whether they had something to do with the behemoth's madness, neither observer could say, but Malygos at least wanted to see them better. Yet Kalec's host was not foolhardy. He waited as Galakrond soared away, watching until the fiend had long vanished into the distance. Only after that did Malygos dare begin to rise-and then he instinctively dropped once more as three other proto-dragons flew in the direction from which Galakrond had originally come. Why exactly Malygos had chosen to hide rather than rise and warn the trio was something Kalec sensed that even his host did not quite understand himself. However, as the three neared, their coloring gave hint that perhaps Malygos had taken the wise course. The three blue-green proto-dragons soared over the landscape as if undeterred by the potential for disaster. Malygos watched as they neared where Galakrond had last paused. At that point, not at all to his surprise, he recognized Coros as the leader. One of the other proto-dragons caught sight of the macabre remnants of Galakrond's last meal. He immediately hissed to Coros. Coros led the descent to the corpses. He alighted near one, studied a few of the bodies for a moment, then glanced in the direction in which the murderous leviathan had headed. With a hiss, Coros rose into the air and headed the same way. His two companions followed.
Malygos-and Kalec-watched with disbelief as the trio raced after Galakrond. Coros did not strike Kalec as suicidal, and Malygos's own thoughts mirrored agreement. Yet neither could fathom any sane reason for Coros to risk himself to such an extent. If he was simply spying on Galakrond, he was doing so in a far more reckless manner than Malygos. Rising, Kalec's host stared at the vanishing figures. Malygos did not know whether to warn the three or leave them to their doom. Past animosities paled at the moment, Malygos not wishing even Coros a fate such as these other proto-dragons had- A ragged hiss erupted from the pile of corpses. Malygos forgot all about Galakrond and Coros as he turned toward the nearby carnage. The first thought flashing through the proto-dragon's mind was that one of the victims had survived. Malygos started toward the bodies, trying to locate the right one. As he neared, another ragged hiss arose from a different direction. Malygos halted, looking there. A third hiss came from yet another location. Several of the victims began to push up. Heads turned almost as one to stare at Kalec's host. Stare . . . with the empty eyes of the undead.
THREE HUNTED BY THE UNDEAD
Malygos retreated, the icy-blue proto-dragon already flapping his wings for flight. Unfortunately, he failed to see one of the undead creatures rising to his right. Its hiss was his only warning. A foul mist exhaled by the undead touched his wing. Malygos roared as he felt a coldness that even he could not stand burn deep into his body. Despite his agony, Malygos exhaled in turn. Frost covered the attacking creature, but whereas it would have stiffened many an adversary, it only slowed the undead. Still, that gave Kalec's host just enough time to leap into the air. Ignoring the pain, he pushed higher and higher. The chorus of nerve-wracking hisses below gave warning that several of the undead were giving swift pursuit. Despite Kalec wishing desperately that the proto-dragon would look down to see how close they were, Malygos kept focused on his ascent. He flew on, seeking the clouds above. Kalec finally understood that his host hoped to evade the winged horrors by losing them in the murkiness of the clouds. Malygos did not breathe easier even upon attaining cover. He veered sharply to his left, then, after a short distance, flew level. Behind him, the hisses of the undead spread throughout the clouds. Some sounded farther and farther away, but others still hinted of pursuers yet on his trail. Malygos kept his jaws clamped tight, breathing through his nostrils as best he could. Any sound, even an exhalation, might prove enough to catch the attention of the undead. Kalec, forced to accept whatever decision his host made, remained impressed with the proto-dragon's intelligence. Despite everything, this Malygos was very much the Malygos who had ruled so wisely for so long. This was the Malygos whom a young Kalec-and every other blue dragon-had looked up to in admiration. And yet he is still a proto-dragon, Kalec reminded himself. How can this be? How can-
Another hiss arose, from in front of Malygos. The pale red corpse collided with Kalec's host. The stench of decay poured over Malygos as the undead proto-dragon hissed in his face. Up close, bits of the skull could be seen through the areas where shreds of dry flesh had fallen away. One eye had sunken in. Teeth dripping with a thick mucus snapped at Malygos's throat. Claws tore at Kalec's host, ripping through scale. Malygos lunged, seizing the undead's lower jaw in his teeth. With one powerful bite, the proto-dragon ripped the jaw loose. A thick black fluid that had once been blood spilled out of the ragged wound. The creature did not falter, but loss of the jaw prevented one source of danger to Malygos. Kalec's host spit out the rotting piece, then quickly exhaled into the exposed throat. The icy mist poured into the undead, freezing the insides. Malygos's foe contorted. It released its hold on him. Malygos whipped his tail forward, striking the frozen torso. The undead shattered, the top and bottom halves falling in separate directions. The winged upper half remained aloft for a moment; then even the pretense of life faded, and the remains dropped out of view below. But from much too nearby came more hisses, indications that several of the other undead had been drawn by the commotion. The taste of decaying flesh still on his tongue, Malygos pushed forward. Another of the animated corpses materialized from the murky clouds, blocking his path. Malygos attempted to arc past it, only to have a second come for him from that direction. Kalec's host immediately stopped flapping. He dropped like a stone, falling beneath the two undead. But as he broke through the bottom of the cloud cover, Malygos discovered that he had escaped two to fall in the midst of four. The empty, hungering faces surrounded him, for the first time causing Malygos to lose hope. No! Do something! Kalec silently roared, to no avail. Do something! Two of the unliving monsters lunged at Malygos, who managed to evade only one. The second seized his left forearm and wing, snaring Malygos thoroughly. The other three fell upon him.
Malygos exhaled on the one holding him. Again, the ice only slowed, not stilled, the undead. And even though none of the four moved with the smooth swiftness of the living proto-dragon, they had him caught. Kalec felt the certainty of death-or worse-creep into Malygos's thoughts, even as the proto-dragon continued to struggle. Then a hard blast of what seemed like sand caught the foremost fiend in the back. The sand struck with such intensity that the shriveled, dry body cracked in two. The undead proto-dragon twitched wildly as it still sought to keep hold of Malygos. There came a ferocious roar from another direction, one so thundering that at first, Kalec and his host both thought that Galakrond had come upon the scene. But the roar was followed by Neltharion's familiar laugh as he ripped into the side of one of the other clinging corpses. The next-nearest corpse turned to attack Neltharion, but again, a blast of sand shot forth, battering the undead so hard that the creature was sent tumbling away. The blast was followed by a brown form that caught the whirling corpse at the throat and bit through the bone and scale with such force that he neatly severed the head from the torso. The body fluttered around aimlessly, heading off in one direction as the newcomer spat out the other remnants with as much obvious distaste as Malygos had earlier displayed. With only the fiend with the broken back and one other foe, Kalec's host was better able to defend himself. He grabbed the grasping hind paw of the ruined creature and thrust it at the second undead proto-dragon. The paw instinctively seized the wing of Malygos's other attacker, giving the icy-blue male an opening as his foremost opponent struggled to pull free. This time, Malygos breathed upon the wings of his broken attacker, exhaling until he had no breath left whatsoever. Vertigo almost overtook Kalec's host, but the proto-dragon fought to stay conscious. Frozen stiff and heavily laden with ice, the wings pulled the one undead down. The second creature-still clutched by the first-also dropped, unfortunately in the process taking Malygos along with both. As the three of them fell, Malygos bit at the arm of the second fiend, fighting through the bone as quickly as he could. Past the hissing countenance of the one undead, the proto-dragon and Kalec saw the ground rushing up.
The bone finally cracked-as did one of Malygos's teeth. The pain was a momentary annoyance compared with what would happen if he did not finish biting through the limb. Kalec's host clamped down, and the last of the bone gave way. Beating hard, Malygos kicked at his foremost foe as he pushed skyward. With a horrendous ripping sound, the last muscles and tendons separated, enabling him to escape the two undead. The animated corpses crashed into the rocky landscape, the collision so intense that both dry forms shattered, sending bits scattering in several directions. By that time, Malygos, the remaining paw finally removed from him and tossed aside, was well into the sky again. And there Malygos beheld not only Neltharion and the brown male whom he and Kalec had noted at Talonixa's gathering, but also Alexstrasza and Ysera. The sisters hovered at opposite ends of the area where the males finished their macabre adversaries, the females keeping wary watch for more threats. Neltharion was in the process of tearing to shreds the creature he fought. Of the brown's foe there was no sign, which could only mean that the newcomer had readily dispatched the undead. As Malygos neared, Neltharion let the last fragments of his opponent fall away. Of the group, only the charcoal-gray male looked cheerful. "Ha! We have won!" "We can still lose," the brown reminded him with a hint of impatience. "Many more not-living near. . . ." Alexstrasza and Ysera joined the trio. "We see nothing," the yellowish female muttered. "Nothing but death." Her sister hissed at her, but Ysera looked undaunted. Through Malygos, Kalec learned that Ysera was of the belief that there was still a way to achieve peace with Galakrond. She was not the only one, either. Malygos eyed the brown male. "I know you." The other dipped his head. "Nozdormu." "Fight well." Neltharion chuckled. "Fights almost as well as me!" Nozdormu's smile was very brief. "Many not-living. Why here? Why now?"
It became apparent to both Kalec and his host that none of the rest had witnessed anything akin to what Malygos had experienced earlier. Nor had anyone evidently seen Coros seemingly flying after Galakrond. For the moment, Malygos chose not to mention the latter incident, the ghastly sight he had seen before that obviously of much more importance. As clever as he was, Malygos was still a proto-dragon. The words he needed to explain properly what he had seen Galakrond do with his victims were hard to put together, especially with danger still close at hand. So bound to Malygos was he that Kalec not only felt the proto-dragon's frustration but also wished that he could speak for him. Through halting words, Malygos did his best. His descriptions were short, but raw emotion filled in many gaps, enhancing his tale. He left the other protodragons shocked, even Neltharion. No one disbelieved him, all understanding that Malygos was to be trusted. "How?" Alexstrasza demanded with much consternation. "How? What has happened with Galakrond?" Malygos thought he understood. "Galakrond must eat much. Galakrond could not find enough. He grew hungry. Too hungry. Ate one of us." Although to Kalec such an act might have once seemed not so shocking- these were proto-dragons, creatures he had thought simply brutes-he saw that they had boundaries much like those of dragons. The proto-dragons might fight to the death against one another, but they did not eat their foes. No matter their savagery, this concept revolted them. Even though they had witnessed Galakrond committing the heinous act on a grand scale, they still did not want to accept it. "Was hungry," Neltharion snarled, his generally cheerful demeanor at last broken by what they were discussing. "Ate one of us. Why eat more? Grazers came north! More food! You saw Galakrond eat! Enough food now! Why still do this?" Malygos shook his head. No one else had an answer, either. There came more hisses. The proto-dragons glanced toward the sounds. The hisses were still far away but seemed to be getting nearer. "We leave," Alexstrasza decided. "Now."
There was no protest, not even from Neltharion. They had no idea how many of the unliving might attack next. Malygos's discovery of how the unliving came to be had altered everything. Malygos instinctively took point- Kalec's world turned upside down, and despite trying to prepare himself for it this time, the dragon blacked out. As ever, the darkness passed swiftly, although in this case, only a brief passage of time-not a return to reality- occurred. The proto-dragons were on the attack, Talonixa leading the charge. Scores of proto-dragons representing nearly all the families with which Kalec's host was familiar dived into the fray. Their enemy was not Galakrond, however, but several undead. Where Malygos and his companions had had a disadvantage in numbers, the opposite was true now. The proto-dragons faced perhaps a dozen of the animated corpses, which Kalec immediately understood had been purposely drawn to the deep canyon in which this battle played out. Through Malygos, Kalec caught a glimpse of Ysera and also knew that Alexstrasza and Neltharion were part of the effort. Nozdormu had refused to be part of it, although not out of any cowardice. Malygos did not know where he was and, at the moment, had no time to care. Outnumbered the horrors might be, but they still dealt death. The first to learn that terrible fact was an impetuous fire-orange female appearing some seasons older than Alexstrasza. One of the initial attackers, she fell upon a smaller undead, once a proto-dragon just out of its juvenile years. However, although the prey looked easy and Malygos had been among those offering warning about the dangers of their enemy, she left herself open to the undead's "breath." The dark, noxious cloud draped over the female's head and wings. She shrugged it off, then opened her mouth to unleash her own blast. But suddenly, the brilliant color of her scales faded wherever the cloud had touched. The flesh withered, and skin flaked away. Instead of exhaling a mighty blast at the fiend, the female let out a rasping cry as her eyes glazed over. And as Malygos-and Kalec-watched, briefly mesmerized, the scale and flesh fell away in the blink of an eye. The exposed skull-the jaws still open-
cracked off and dropped out of sight. The torso, the ruined wings feebly flapping, followed. Above, Talonixa roared in anger at the proto-dragon's fatal error. Leading another of her family, she dropped upon the small undead and ripped it apart through the back. For good measure, the imposing female bit off the head and spat it toward one of the other flying corpses. "Kill like that! No more fools!" Her advice, based in great part on information Malygos and Neltharion had relayed prior to this assault, served the rest well. Acting in teams of as many as five, the proto-dragons tore into the remaining not-living. One corpse was torn apart in short order; another burned to a crisp. There were still fatalities despite Talonixa's insistence, fatalities that Malygos had expected and believed could have been avoided. Emaciated they might be, but the undead nonetheless had surprising physical strength and an unnatural tenacity. Moreover, they did not have to inhale prior to unleashing their horrific clouds of decay. That dire fact was discovered by two proto-dragons who assumed that they were safe after avoiding the initial blasts. Their stilltwitching, decomposing bodies spiraled to the distant ground below. Yet another attacker might have suffered the same ghastly fate, if not for Neltharion dropping down on the undead just as it was about to unleash a blast. The future Deathwing seized the corpse's head with both hind paws and ripped it clean off. A small gush of the deadly gas poured forth from the open neck but touched no one. The charcoal-gray proto-dragon roared with laughter as he tossed away the head and began to rip into the torso, which continued to fly in a haphazard circle. Malygos shook his head at his friend's enthusiasm. For Kalec's host, the sooner this ended, the better. He had no love for what they were doing. Like Alexstrasza and Ysera, Malygos still saw the living in the faces of these abominations. These were victims, too. They had to be destroyed, but there was little reason to take joy in the effort. Talonixa struck the last blow, exhaling hard at a lone undead. The bolt of lightning she unleashed set the dry flesh ablaze. The animated corpse managed to stay aloft, but a second bolt shattered the already crumbling body, sending ashes scattering everywhere.
With the destruction of her foe, the huge golden female roared triumphantly. Her cry was taken up by many of the others, causing Malygos to wince as he thought of how loud they were. It had been in part their cries that were used in the first place to help lure these not-living to them. Malygos marveled that Talonixa and her supporters did not think this through, but he knew better than to try to speak the truth. Talonixa did not abide those who did not agree with her and had already scarred a copper male in the face for questioning her. She also had several zealous followers willing to do worse to any other naysayers. For now, the sisters, Neltharion, and Kalec's host were going along with Talonixa's decisions while they argued over what better choice to make. What that choice might be, none of them had as yet been able to suggest, and all knew that time was quickly running out. Kalec could also see the disaster looming and did not think this brief triumph foreshadowed the same against Galakrond any more than Malygos did. Kalec silently railed at his own defenselessness in the matter, and at that moment, he realized that he felt more attuned to these ancient events than to his own troubles in the present. This is not right, Kalec thought. This is a reflection of the past. It's done! The future is the only battle left to be fought! But still, Kalec felt as much a part of this small band of proto-dragons as Malygos was. When Alexstrasza and Ysera spoke to his host, it was as if they spoke to Kalec. Even more surprising, when Neltharion stood at Malygos's side, fighting along with him as any true friend and comrade would, Kalec experienced the same kinship Malygos had developed with the charcoal-gray male. Kinship with Deathwing . . . and through a host who would someday become almost as much of a threat to Azeroth. The notion shook Kalec, and he railed anew at what had happened to him, hoping that somehow he could return to his own time and body. Young Malygos, ever ignorant of Kalec's plight, was more concerned with his friend. He noted Ysera rapidly descending into the canyon, her flight path somewhat erratic. Seeing no sign of Alexstrasza, Malygos chose to follow the yellowish female himself.
With what was obvious effort, Ysera alighted just a few yards above the bottom. The scorched, torn remnants of undead lay scattered below her. As Malygos dropped near her, he saw that Ysera's breathing had become labored. Within Malygos, Kalec-his own distress momentarily forgotten-shared his host's concern for the other proto-dragon. Ysera did not notice Malygos until he was almost upon her. Even then, she only looked up at him with sullen eyes, then continued her efforts to regain her breath. The icy male landed beside her but did not speak. Observing Ysera, Malygos noted her gaze drifting from one ripped piece of dry flesh to another. Neither Malygos nor Kalec could make sense of her observations; the fragments were from a variety of families, including both Malygos's and Neltharion's but not, upon closer inspection, Ysera's. "Not here . . ." she finally murmured as her breathing calmed. "Not here . . ." After a moment, Malygos asked, "Who?" "Dralad." The name meant nothing to either Kalec or his host. Malygos waited, and both were rewarded a few breaths later as Ysera clarified. "Clutch brother . . ." Malygos hissed low, then muttered, "He is dead." "These were, too." That had occurred to both Malygos and Kalec, but not what Ysera was implying. "Saw body," Malygos offered. She looked up at the male, her gaze steady and demanding. "Not burned by my sister. You destroy it?" Malygos shook his head. There had been no thought of destroying the dead at that point. Even though this generation had seen proto-dragons leap to a level of intelligence far in advance of anything they had developed before, the notion of a proper burial was not something the creatures had yet conceived. Even dragons, Kalec knew, simply preferred to come to their final rest near the temple. And, oddly, near Galakrond. "Watched every not-living," Ysera went on, stretching her wings. She looked recovered from her bout, although she was clearly still somewhat weary. "Not
found. Not found." "His body-" "Not there!" the female snapped. Then, looking more tired again, she shrugged off their conversation and took to the air. Kalec's host watched as she ascended. What he recalled of that discovery had made him believe that Ysera's clutch brother had not risen as so many others had. Other early victims had remained dead. Alexstrasza had no doubt said something to that effect to her sister, but Ysera's own search and its lack of success bothered Malygos . . . and Kalec. Was it possible that the older dead were also rising? If so, then the threat to the living proto-dragons was far worse than they had imagined. Malygos shook his head, far too many thoughts assailing him. He was still a proto-dragon, no matter how clever he had always regarded himself to be. That he believed Alexstrasza would have been just as pressed by all these concerns did not make Malygos feel any better. Kalec, with so much going on in the present but now trapped in this vision of the past, could again easily sympathize - A low, barely audible hiss from the southern end of the canyon drew Malygos's attention. It was so short that neither the proto-dragon nor Kalec was certain that he had heard it, and yet Kalec, at least, knew that both had. Keeping low, Malygos cautiously crawled south. His eyes darted to every shadow, observed every large shape, be it the remains of an animated corpse or what simply proved to be a rock. He listened carefully for a repeat of the hiss but heard only the wind coursing through the canyon, a sound both knew was not the same one heard earlier. Possible answers ran through the proto-dragon's mind as he moved. A notliving that had managed to hide from the hunters? But these corpses did not hide. They only knew their relentless hunger and thus ever searched for prey; they did not run away from it. Another potential source for the sound was an injured member among the attackers. This made more sense, but why had no one noticed the wounded fighter missing? Kalec watched with Malygos but saw nothing. He questioned the wisdom of the proto-dragon's determination to find the noise, but there was no stopping Malygos.
Shadows filled the area ahead. Malygos paused, then plunged into the darkness. His eyes began to adjust to the change in lighting- Something touched Malygos on the back. The proto-dragon's head twisted around. Both he and Kalec caught sight of a smaller, flowing figure. Malygos hissed as his head suddenly pounded. For Kalec, though, it was as if all the thunder that had ever raged over Azeroth gathered for one fantastic storm. Had he paws of his own, Kalec would have clamped them against his ears. As it was, he could only roar as the pounding rose beyond bearing- And for once, Kalec was grateful when darkness finally claimed him.
FOUR SHIFTING REALITIES
Once again, Kalec woke covered in sweat and gasping for air. He also again woke in his half-elven form. Those things did not surprise him as much as what he saw when his eyes finally focused enough to see his surroundings. It was, as far as he could ascertain, the same canyon in which he had just left young Malygos. Rubbing his eyes, Kalec looked again at the rocky landscape. There were many changes, yet somehow Kalec was certain that this was indeed the same location. And the fact that he was so certain also bothered him. Kalec had visited hundreds and hundreds of places during his lifetime, and while some, such as the Sunwell Plateau-where he had last seen Anveena-and the Nexus, were obviously memorable to him, there was no reason he should be so certain that this was the same place. True, Kalec had just visited it through Malygos a few moments ago-assuming it was only a few moments ago-but countless millennia had passed since the proto-dragon had actually been there, and in that time, nature and possibly other factors had remade the canyon over and over. Yet Kalec could have sworn on his own life that this was the same place. He spun, expecting to find the accursed artifact on the ground next to him. While it surprised him not to see it, he also had no doubt that it was responsible for this little incident, too. What devilishness are you up to now? Kalec demanded of the unseen relic. He did not expect an answer, of course. He expected only more questions, only more mysteries. Only more madness. The calm, almost detached attitude that he had developed while part of the past had once again vanished with his return to the present. Now all the stresses struck Kalec so hard that he abruptly drove his fist into a nearby rock wall. Had he not also instinctively shielded that fist, it would have been his bones, rather than the wall, that cracked. As it was, the shattering rock still splattered him in the face, making the former Aspect step back in surprise.
And only then did he see the footprints in the hard soil. A hundred thousand beasts and a fair number of sentient beings had no doubt traveled through this canyon during the vast length of time since Kalec's previous sojourn, and these prints could have belonged to any of those, but once more, Kalec knew that these were not random footprints. The first ones were those of some fairly giant creature of a reptilian appearance: a protodragon. They came from the same direction from which Malygos had come in those last moments before Kalec had been thrust back to his own time and form. He even recognized places where the proto-dragon had paused before the barely seen flowing shape had fallen upon them. Thinking about that other figure, the former Aspect turned his attention to another set of prints a little behind those he was certain were Malygos's. Smaller prints. The prints of a booted or sandaled two-legged form such as an elf or a human. It brought to mind the cloaked and hooded shape that Kalec had caught a brief view of more than once, a being somehow tied to the artifact. As the blue studied the footprints, he noticed that they went on beyond those of Malygos. Despite the ages, Kalec found it easy to follow them for as far as he could see. They continued on to the south, each step seemingly seared into the rock just for his benefit. With a bit of trepidation but even more determination to find some answers, Kalec traced the footprints. They quickly moved beyond those marking where Malygos had stood. Kalec wondered what had happened at that point. Had the proto-dragon turned? Had he discovered whatever it was Kalec now headed toward? That he was still concerned for what had happened so long ago frustrated Kalec. All that should have mattered was to find some escape from the artifact's incessant intrusions into his mind before it destroyed his already wavering sanity. Kalec did not know why he had transformed into his current shape, but at the moment, he found it comforting despite having to climb over several parts of the rocky path. He had spent so much of his recent past in his humanoid guise, especially when he was with Anveena or, of late, when dealing with Jaina. Once, when he had known Alexstrasza's legendary consort, Korialstrasz, Kalec
had wondered why the crimson male had spent so much time in a humanoid form, pretending to be the wizard Krasus. Now Kalec no longer questioned that preference. The path led into a shadowed region that reminded him that much of the area through which he had tracked had also once been shielded from the sun. Yet, despite the obvious upheaval needed to bring down so much rock, either the prints had remained uncovered, or someone had taken time to clear the rubble away. Before he could follow that line of thought, the trail turned toward the rock face to his left. Kalec frowned, then saw a narrow cut in the rock, an opening just wide enough for him to slip into in his present form. For some reason, he did not think that a coincidence. The slit proved even narrower than Kalec first calculated, forcing him to wriggle to get through. The darkness within stirred uncomfortable memories of the utter blackness that overcame him almost every time he slipped from reality to the visions and back again. Kalec shivered but pressed a few steps deeper before finally summoning a glowing sphere. In its purple light, the withered visage of a proto-dragon glared down at him. Kalec flung himself to the side, at the same time sending the sphere at the looming monster. The former Spell-Weaver's efforts changed the simple illumination spell into a full attack. The sphere exploded as it hit the protodragon's chest, searing into the dry flesh. A musky scent assailed Kalec as the magical energy burned into the protodragon. The former Aspect summoned a new and larger sphere, fully revealing the cave's interior. More than a dozen additional proto-dragons, all as withered, peered at Kalec. He readied a potent spell, then paused when he realized that neither they nor the one he had attacked had thus far moved. These were not, he finally recognized, the undead that Malygos and the others had fought. They were merely dead proto-dragons. Merely? As Kalec observed them closer, he saw differences. Each of these proto-dragons was in some way misshapen. Yet it did not look as if those defects were the results of something that had happened in the egg. Kalec eyed one
proto-dragon who appeared to have a fifth limb starting to grow out of his side. Another had a third eye just above her right shoulder. What sort of macabre display is this? Kalec stared at the group and saw that each also bore some injury. As he studied one corpse after another, he saw that those injuries had certainly impaired these proto-dragons, if not killed them outright. Moreover, the former Aspect saw that the dead actually lay sprawled against one another, as if they had been gathered in haste. Kalec paused again. It was clear to him that he had been steered to this place by the relic or whatever power it served, but what was he supposed to learn from this grotesque spectacle? A creaking sound set his nerves on edge and made him summon yet another spell. He turned to find the first proto-dragon tumbling forward, the damage done by the altered sphere too much for him to maintain his stability. The towering corpse struck the rocky floor and broke into pieces. The head rolled closer to Kalec, and in what remained of the second sphere's light, he finally recognized the reptilian countenance. Malygos. Kalec retreated in shock, shaking his head all the while. This can't be true! It can't be! It's not Malygos! That's not possible- His mind spun. Kalec fell against one of the other corpses, which caused it to tilt into another. Suddenly, all the proto-dragons began falling toward him. In desperation, Kalec shut his eyes and concentrated his power all around him. The cave filled with brilliant white energy, so bright it blinded even its caster. Gasping, the former Aspect dropped to one knee. Head down, he waited for the corpses to bury him underneath them. When that did not happen, he cautiously looked up . . . . . . and found himself kneeling in his sanctum. At first, he dared not move. Kalec shivered as he tried to verify that what he now saw around him was the truth, more than the cave had been. He felt absolutely certain that he had been in the canyon-except that would mean that the relic had transported him from one part of the world to another with less effort than it required Kalec merely to breathe.
A rapid thumping sound echoed in his head. It took a moment for the blue to recognize his own heartbeat. He tried to slow his breathing, also causing his heart to shift to a more normal rhythm. His surroundings did not change. Still kneeling, Kalec touched the floor. It felt solid, but then, so had the corpse against which he had fallen and the rock through which he had slipped. "This is real. This is real," Kalec muttered, the next second feeling uncomfortable at the fact that he needed to speak out loud while he sought to convince himself. But the cave was real, too! It was! He could not say which was worse, the notion of being tossed about the world or simply being made to believe it had happened. Either way, the artifact continued to intrude too thoroughly into his thoughts. The present had become a series of moments whose lengths of stability he could no longer trust, while the visions were becoming more and more what seemed the true reality. Kalec knew, though, that if he allowed himself to become too attuned to the visions, he might at some point never return to the here and now. The former Aspect gritted his teeth. If this even is the here and now. Kalec rose and turned. The continued bane to his existence sat where last he recalled it, still gently emanating its own magical illumination. "I'm tired of all these games!" he shouted at it. "Tell me what you want!" But although it could do so much, although it could manipulate him in so many ways, the one thing that the relic apparently could not do was speak to him. Kalec? The blue male jumped. Eyes wide, he glared at the artifact, waiting for it to speak again. Kalec? The voice came from inside his head, but the relic was not the source of it, he finally understood. Someone was calling to him. Kalec knew that he should recognize the speaker. "Jaina . . ." Despite earlier misgivings about letting her potentially discover what was happening to him, Kalec now grasped at the chance to answer her call. The archmage represented part of that stability he fought to maintain.
"Jaina!" Kalec called to the empty air, only belatedly realizing how desperate his reply sounded. Taking a deep breath, he tried again. "Jaina, I hear you. Wait." Steeling himself, he re-created the gap in the air that enabled him to communicate face to face with her. Through it, the vision of Jaina's chambers appeared. Although she had called to him, when the spellcaster first formed, she was leaning over a wide wooden table, inspecting some parchment. "Kalec . . ." Jaina's initial smile faded as she looked over the former Aspect. "Are you sure you're well?" He had thought that he had adjusted his appearance appropriately, but clearly, in some way, he had not entirely hidden the incredible stress he was going through even at that moment. "I'm more . . . I've been under more pressure than I wanted to admit," Kalec began, thinking how best to keep vague but not too vague. "The Nexus . . . you understand." "You don't have to say any more, not unless you want to. I'd be willing to listen, if it would help." It was an offer he seriously considered, if only for a moment. However, Kalec quickly came to the conclusion that this was a matter he could not involve Jaina in. There was too much risk that she might fall prey to the artifact, just as he had. "Thank you for that," Kalec finally answered, trying to sound more relaxed. He remembered that he had heard her call to him earlier. His concern for his sanity briefly receded to the background as he concentrated on whatever dire problem the archmage confronted. "But enough of me. You need my help with something. What is it?" Jaina looked confused. "What do you mean?" "You tried to reach me before. I wasn't able to answer as I was this time." Her expression grew more troubled. "I don't understand. I've only been trying to answer you." "Me?" She leaned so close that if she had actually been in his sanctum and not merely a projection, he could have touched her. "You've called to me twice since our last conversation. I responded both times, and you finally answered just now-"
"I called to-" slipped from Kalec's tongue before he managed to catch himself. His mind raced. He could not recall reaching out to Jaina either time, instead only hearing her voice in turn. While she might be mistaken, Kalec doubted that. More likely was the possibility that some part of his subconscious had sought help from the only one he thought he could trust to understand his situation. He did not even want to approach the other former Aspects, aware that they had some reason for making no mention of all that Kalec had learned thus far from the visions. It came to his attention too late that he had been standing in silence before Jaina, his gaze now turned to the empty air to his right. Not at all to his surprise, she was staring at him with even greater worry than before. "Kalec, tell me what's wrong." Struggling for an answer, he blurted the only thing he could think of. "The collection is more massive than I could have imagined, and the Nexus's protections are failing at the same time. It's proved to be a monumental task." Her eyes narrowed in understanding. As a sorceress-and especially the leader of the Kirin Tor-Jaina Proudmoore could appreciate the tremendous wealth of magical knowledge and power contained in the Nexus. She also understood the danger of leaving all that unguarded. "I know I offered this before, but please listen this time. I can gather a number of trusted magi and lead them-" "No. Not yet. Thank you." Kalec had become nearly as distrustful of the other magi as they clearly had been of him after his unfortunate move into Dalaran. He could not imagine that things would go well with them around him in the Nexus, and that was not even taking the artifact in account. Jaina looked doubtful about his decision but finally nodded. "All right. But the offer is open. I will see to it that any who enter the Nexus will do as they're told. You know thaaaaattttt . . ." The archmage and her surroundings rippled, grew distorted. Jaina's body twisted, and her face stretched forward. "Jaina?" Kalec feared some force had attacked her while they had spoken. ". . . wrrrrrrong, Kkkkkaleeeccc," she answered, even as her body grew scaled and her sanctum collapsed, becoming a rocky overhang. Her robes
became wings, and before Kalec's eyes, Jaina Proudmoore transformed into a dragon. No, Kalec thought. Not a dragon . . . a proto-dragon. "Kaaaallllleeeccc?" rumbled the proto-dragon. He had no chance to answer her, no chance even to dismiss the link between them. Kalec wished it closed, then lost track of both it and the altered Jaina as he felt his body shifting into a more reptilian form. Thoughts other than his own filled his head, dominated his mind. Kalec tried to roar, but his mouth was no longer his. He felt himself receding into the background . . . and the mind of Malygos taking the forefront. The Nexus had become a chilly seashore that reminded Kalec of the area where Malygos had once fished. Malygos was not alone. Alexstrasza stood roughly the same distance from Kalec's host as Jaina had seemed from Kalec. "I will do that," the fire-orange female said to Malygos as she rose into the sky. Alexstrasza darted off to the east, leaving Malygos on his own. What they had discussed, Kalec neither knew nor cared about. He strained uselessly to return to the Nexus, even concentrating on Jaina in the hopes that the link that had helped him at least twice would do so again. Yet, as he feared, nothing changed. Malygos took off, heading out to sea. While it was evident that the protodragon hunted a meal, he also appeared to be watching or waiting for something that his vague thoughts did not reveal to Kalec. That further frustrated the dragon, who had assumed that if he had been thrust back into the visions, it had been for some purpose. Kalec's host scooped up one of a pod of aquatic air breathers a half-mile offshore, devouring the creature in two gulps. While not as delicate about his meals as Alexstrasza, Malygos did try to kill his prey quickly and relatively painlessly. Still, Kalec had no taste for the hunt right now and hoped that Malygos would either quickly fill his belly or remember something more important. The meal did come to an end, but not as a result of one of those choices. Rather, Malygos suddenly raised his bloody jaws from his second kill and peered up into the overcast sky. Kalec instantly thought of the undead, but instead,
Malygos's sharp gaze fixed on a pair of proto-dragons skirting the bottom of the cloud cover. Kalec's host leapt into the air and raced toward the pair. As he neared, it became evident that there were more than two. Kalec counted four, but Malygos counted five, with the fifth being none other than Ysera. And with her flew Coros. Hissing, Malygos came up behind the pair. Kalec understood his caution, for other than Ysera, the rest of the party were all proto-dragons Kalec knew to be hostile to his host. Coros noticed him first. Malygos's rival sneered, then hissed warning. Ysera looked over her shoulder. Upon recognizing Malygos, Alexstrasza's sister grew visibly frustrated. "I will do this!" she insisted. "We are right!" Thoughts spilled through Malygos's mind and into Kalec's. Ysera continuing to search among the dead-and the defeated undead-for her clutch brother despite knowing that it was unlikely she would find him. Alexstrasza's sister growing more vehement in her distaste for all the violence. The yellowish proto-dragon preaching her beliefs to others and finding a few who saw as she did. And one of those appeared to be Coros, who had seemed so fanatically loyal to Talonixa not all that long ago. Now Coros also preached peace, preached finding a way to live under the rule of Galakrond. His notions did not exactly match those of Ysera, but they were close enough for both suddenly to work to convince others. Malygos saw only naivety in Ysera's dreams and did not trust the mercurial nature of Coros's. Kalec now understood what his host and Alexstrasza had been discussing; Ysera's sister had been searching for her for three days, hoping to make her see the error of her ways before she did something foolish. To Malygos, Alexstrasza appeared too late to prevent the last. He felt that any plan hatched even in part by Coros was certain to be filled with danger and treachery. Once Malygos might have simply let things happen as they would, but more and more, Kalec's host saw the intricacies involved in even the simplest decisions. The repercussions for the proto-dragon race as a whole were many, not to mention the fact that Malygos now felt a loyalty to the sisters that in
some ways surpassed even that to his own family. He had fought side by side with both of them and knew their dedication and trustworthiness. He also knew that Coros lacked either of those qualities. "Sister seeks you," Malygos informed Ysera, indicating the direction Alexstrasza had flown only a short while ago. "That way." "Saw her," Ysera responded with a snort. "Let her fly on." This startled Malygos, who knew how close the pair was despite the constant bickering. "Should listen to her! Galakrond will not-" "Galakrond will." Her short but incredible interjection caught both Malygos and Kalec by surprise. Malygos hissed in confusion. Coros grinned but did not interrupt. "There will be peace," Ysera announced with some pride. "Galakrond will talk peace." "You do not know-" She raised her head higher, taking a dominant position over Malygos. "We spoke with Galakrond. He will talk peace." The madness that had affected Kalec in the present now looked as if it was taking hold of him in the vision. He could not believe that he had heard correctly, and judging by Malygos's racing emotions, Kalec's host could not believe it, either. "Galakrond . . . talked with Galakrond?" Coros finally joined in, his triumph clear in both his tone and his expression. "Peace we will have . . . if all will listen." Before Malygos could retort, Ysera said, "All must listen . . . and we must go." "Go where?" asked Kalec's host as both his mind and Kalec's raced. "Find Talonixa," she answered, as if that should have been clear to anyone. "Tell her. Tell all." That said, she veered off. Coros, the other three proto-dragons in tow, followed. Malygos stared, wanting to believe Alexstrasza's sister but also aware of just what a monster Galakrond had become. Still, if Ysera spoke the truth- "No." Malygos shook off that possibility, and Kalec once again admired the analytic abilities of the future Aspect even as a proto-dragon. However, his admiration faded as both he and Malygos thought of what would happen if Ysera did convince the others.
The proto-dragon quickly turned. He had to find Alexstrasza and somehow help her make Ysera see sense. Even though Kalec's host-and Kalec, too- understood the odds of Ysera convincing Talonixa and the rest of the merits of her plan, the two could not help but feel that somehow matters would end in new disaster and that more, many more, would die as a result.
FIVE FATEFUL DECISIONS
Malygos grew more desperate as his search for Alexstrasza stretched to hours. At that very moment, Ysera-with Coros's aid-might already be convincing Talonixa of the merit of her intentions and Galakrond's willingness to agree to everything. Malygos could foresee only catastrophe if that happened. His thinking was another example of the leap Kalec had witnessed among several of the proto-dragons. Malygos saw nothing new or odd about his considerations for the future, whereas among some current proto-dragons, the here and now was all that existed. The lengthy search had had its own effect on Kalec. Able to feel the wind as Malygos flew, Kalec had calmed down somewhat. When he was in the visions, he had no choice concerning the path upon which he had been set and therefore tried to become as detached as he could. Yet Kalec could not help but consider the choices left to his host. Unaware of how this entire struggle had ultimately turned out, Kalec was not even certain that Malygos was right in seeking Alexstrasza's aid in stopping Ysera. Although Kalec had believed as Malygos had when first hearing about the suggestion of peace with the marauding behemoth, he also knew that, in his time, Galakrond's skeleton lay near the heart of the Dragonblight and that the gigantic proto-dragon was considered the Father of Dragons. How that had come to be, Kalec could not fathom. Had Galakrond achieved salvation after all, something that had escaped the future Neltharion and even, regrettably, Malygos himself? He forgot all about such questions as Malygos spotted a red speck perched atop a tall hill. While to Kalec it might have appeared to be any member of Alexstrasza's family, his host was absolutely certain that he had found Ysera's sister, and within a few strong beats of the male's wings, that proved to be the case. She noted Malygos's arrival with a hopeful gaze. Kalec felt his host's guilt at coming with something other than good news.
"Found Ysera," he started. "With Coros." Alexstrasza eyed him in disbelief. "Coros?" Malygos quickly explained what had happened, including Ysera's current thinking. The fire-orange female hissed in growing frustration as she listened. "Must go to her!" Alexstrasza snarled as soon as Malygos had finished. "This must not be!" The male proto-dragon blocked her path. "Wait! Ysera will not listen!" She glared at him but finally nodded. "No. Ysera will not listen. She will die." "Will not die," Malygos insisted. "Ysera will not die." Alexstrasza shook her head. Yet rather than shove past her companion, the female proto-dragon hesitated. She wanted to believe Malygos. "Coros not good," he informed Alexstrasza. "Coros always lies." It was a simplistic declaration but, from what Kalec could glean from Malygos's memories, close to the truth. "We watch Coros. Find truth. Show Ysera." While Kalec's host did want to help the sisters, the icy-blue male also looked forward to revealing his rival as he knew him to be. Coros was one protodragon Malygos would not have minded being devoured by Galakrond, provided Coros could be prevented from rising from the dead afterward. Cocking her head, Alexstrasza considered his words. It did not take her long to nod eagerly. "Yes. Prove Coros false! Ysera will see truth!" Kalec was not so certain about the merit of Malygos's suggestion, but he distrusted Coros as much as Malygos did. Kalec suspected that Coros thought he could take advantage of everyone, even Galakrond, while raising his status among the other proto-dragons in the process. It was a foolish, dangerous notion- A familiar roar thundered across the heavens. Immediately, Malygos and Alexstrasza dived from their perches into more shadowed regions below. Neither proto-dragon cared about dignity. Malygos found an overhang that had enough room for one and left it to Alexstrasza, who reluctantly accepted his sacrifice. The male moved on until he came to a depression in a hillside. It was not large enough to fit him, but he nonetheless planted himself against it, then held his breath.
And barely had he done so than a darker, vaster shadow engulfed everything. A hulking form covered the sky: Galakrond, on his endless hunt. Despite his much too near proximity to the insatiable leviathan, Malygos forgot his danger as details of Galakrond's underside swept past. The smaller proto-dragon even slipped out of the depression as he stared at the growths more and more dominating Galakrond. Growths that had an odd resemblance to unfinished body parts. Kalec watched with equal horror as Malygos glimpsed one rudimentary limb after another dangling from random locations. There were forelimbs and hind, with partial paws. Vestigial wings flapped futilely in the wind caused by Galakrond's swift flight. What might have been a partially formed head-a head! -thrust out of a region near the behemoth's hip. There were other shapes that neither Kalec nor his host could identify but that both assumed were just as unnerving. Malygos sat where he was, entirely oblivious to the fact that all Galakrond had to do was glance back to see him. Fortunately, the gigantic proto-dragon continued on, not only racing beyond view mere seconds later but also heading in a direction that would not set the two smaller ones on the same path. Malygos exhaled as Galakrond vanished; then he quickly joined Alexstrasza. "Must go now!" the fire-orange female urged. "Now, before Galakrond comes again." "Now," agreed Malygos, following as Alexstrasza took off. However, unsaid by the male proto-dragon-but sensed by the ever-present Kalec-was the thought that even if the pair flew faster than Galakrond, it might already be too late to avert catastrophe. •   •   • The two proto-dragons headed toward the region where Talonixa had previously called the gathering. It had not yet been discovered by Galakrond, but Talonixa had already used the growing risk of that happening to stir the other proto-dragons toward mounting their attack. Her sense of urgency, fueled by her desire for vengeance, clearly still prevailed. "More of us here!" she roared. "So many more! Galakrond cannot fight all! Cannot!"
Proto-dragons everywhere hissed and roared their agreement. Kalec judged that Talonixa had been speaking for some time, which gave credit not only to her relative eloquence but also to her continued domination of the others. "There!" rumbled Alexstrasza. "She is there!" Following her gaze, Kalec's host beheld the smaller sister not far from Talonixa's rocky perch. Coros stood next to her, his three comrades a little farther back and looking as if they did not wish to be anywhere near the pair. Both Malygos and Kalec found that odd, especially where the trio's leader was concerned. Why avoid Coros? Talonixa hissed in pleasure at the gathering's response. Coros chose that moment to ease up to her. He leaned close and whispered in her ear. Her black eyes narrowed as they fell upon Ysera. Coros immediately retreated, his expression veiled. The dominant female unleashed a mighty roar that made Kalec's host cringe as he landed, for surely every living creature within half a day's flight could hear it. Still, out of respect to Alexstrasza, Malygos did not depart for safer climes. Instead, he alighted with her at a place where they could view the tableau unfolding. "This runt speaks," Talonixa declared, with one wing indicating Ysera. To Alexstrasza's sibling, she curtly added, "Speak!" Ysera looked to Coros, who merely nodded. Alexstrasza growled low at the male's action. "He leaves Ysera alone!" "That is Coros." Malygos had already expected his rival's support of Ysera to be weak. Coros would do what he could to deflect focus away from him unless it served to raise his status. If Ysera managed to sway the majority, Coros would suddenly be there beside her. The yellowish female pulled herself up to her full height. While she was not a very impressive proto-dragon when compared with Talonixa, there was something in Ysera's manner that Malygos-and Kalec-found admirable. Weak though she was, Alexstrasza's sibling had an inherent determination that made her seem larger, more dominating, than she physically was. "We are many!" she began, her first statement receiving a chorus of approving hisses. "We are many . . . but Galakrond is Galakrond!"
The approving hisses faded as the gathered proto-dragons tried to digest what she meant by the last. "Galakrond is strong! Galakrond is powerful!" "We are many!" one of the listening crowd roared back. Others hissed in agreement. "We are many," Ysera repeated with a nod. "And many will die against Galakrond." Several of the listeners glanced with unease at one another. Seeing this, Talonixa unleashed an angry hiss. Ignoring her, Ysera pressed her case. "Many can be saved! Peace will save them!" She stepped toward the thickest part of the gathering. "Must talk with Galakrond! Galakrond talked before! Remember when Galakrond was with us! Hunted with us! We talk peace, Galakrond will listen-" A thundering laugh cut her off. Talonixa looked around at the other protodragons as she mocked Ysera's earnest words. "Galakrond will listen? Ha! Galakrond hunted with us? Galakrond now hunts us, yes? Listen? Never!" Ysera tried to interject, but she was drowned out not only by more laughter from Talonixa but also by the laughter of those joining in with the larger female. Alexstrasza growled. She started forward, clearly wanting to stand by her sister. Malygos cut in front of her. "No. Ysera will not like that." The fire-orange female almost snapped at him, but then she hesitated. She eyed Ysera, wanting to comfort her, then finally nodded. "Yes . . . would not like that. Never liked that." Malygos and Alexstrasza-and Kalec, who initially had expected Alexstrasza to fly to Ysera, something he would have done in her place-could only watch as Ysera's effort fell apart. Ysera looked crestfallen and confused. She glanced around as if seeking someone who was clearly not there. "Coros," Kalec's host rumbled. "Where is Coros?" Indeed, the other male had vanished at some point, along with his three comrades. Malygos searched the gathering and caught a glimpse of what he thought was one of the trio disappearing over a distant rock.
Before he could decide what to do, Talonixa seized control of the gathering again. With a tremendous roar, she silenced those who had been mocking Ysera with her. "No peace!" she called. "Never! Galakrond hunts us. We now hunt Galakrond, yes?" Roars of approval reverberated through the area. Ysera, her head low in a submissive posture, crept back. Alexstrasza, looking more distraught than ever, pleaded with her eyes to Malygos. Kalec's host nodded. "Yes . . . now good." As she rushed to console Ysera, Malygos quickly sought out Neltharion. Finding neither him nor even the brown male, Nozdormu, Malygos climbed down from his perch in search of them, just as Talonixa took further advantage of Ysera's failed attempt for peace. "We are many! We will win-" "Attack now!" urged one proto-dragon. "No! I decide! Others come! Three suns pass, and we attack! Galakrond falls!" Malygos paused at hearing this decision, the first time Talonixa had proclaimed it. He hissed, not liking that things were abruptly moving so fast. As the other proto-dragons drank in this grand proclamation and began to cheer, Malygos caught sight of Coros himself. The other male's head had risen above an outcropping farther to the north. Coros immediately sank out of view, but without seeing that Malygos had spotted him. More distrusting of his rival than ever, even in this dire time, Malygos scurried faster among the rocks. He did not want to be seen in turn. Coros intended something sinister, and both Malygos and Kalec were in agreement that he needed to be followed. Crawling along the landscape like one of the tiny lizards that made for the good occasional snack, Malygos circled around the area, seeking some hint of Coros or his companions. In the background, Talonixa continued to proclaim to the other proto-dragons. While Malygos could not understand her words anymore, her tone preached triumph over Galakrond. Pushing aside all thought of what would happen three suns from now, Malygos increased his pace as best as he could in such an awkward position. He
yearned to fly but dared not until he knew where those he hunted were. Kalec, with no body of his own, more than understood. Then, as if something sensed their desire, a single shape rose in the distance. It was followed by a second, then a third and a fourth. Coros and his followers flew low and quickly vanished over the northern horizon. Malygos kept equally low as he pursued. He still had no proof that Coros was up to something, but the simple fact that it was Coros was all that mattered. Kalec mostly knew of the other proto-dragon from Malygos's memories, but what little he had seen of Coros matched well with what his host thought of his rival. Malygos wished that he could have located at least Neltharion, but there was no time. Coros's speed indicated urgency. Malygos needed to know where he went, and because of that, so did Kalec. More than once, Malygos lost sight of the four, but persistence enabled him to regain the trail each time, until the point where they descended over a series of ridges. Malygos hissed angrily as he smelled the air in hopes of locating the four. He knew Coros's stench well enough, yet he could not locate it. But another, unsettling scent wafted past his nostrils. It was fainter yet so distinct that the proto-dragon could not help but focus on it. There was something about it that spoke of a strength different from that of one of his kind. Despite wishing to follow Coros, Malygos veered toward where the scent had come from. Kalec, too, was intrigued, but for other reasons. There was something familiar not in the scent but rather in its very existence. Malygos followed the trail a short way before it abruptly vanished. He alighted on a high rock and searched his surroundings but saw nothing- And he suddenly had the sensation that he was being observed. The proto-dragon quickly peered over his left wing. Both Kalec and his host expected to see nothing, yet this time, they were wrong. The figure was tiny in comparison with the proto-dragon, but neither Malygos nor Kalec truly believed that it lacked the power to confront Malygos should that be its desire. While the proto-dragon vaguely recalled a glimpse of
this creature, it was Kalec who was most stunned. It was the same figure he had seen in other flashes of vision, even in his own time. Who are you? What are you? Kalec demanded uselessly. "Who are you?" Malygos also demanded, echoing the thoughts he could not have heard. "What are you?" Even as he repeated Kalec's questions, both found themselves staring at empty space. However, barely had this registered with Malygos than he noticed the figure at the edge of his vision. Turning that way, the proto-dragon again confronted the billowing shape. While Malygos tried to make sense of not only the rippling appearance-not having any notion of what garments were-but also the creature's ability to vanish and reappear elsewhere, Kalec noted the powerful magic the mysterious form wielded. Powerful magic that might at some point have created the infernal artifact. When the figure did not answer, the proto-dragon snarled and leapt closer. The cloaked and hooded form vanished again, this time reappearing farther to the southeast. It's leading us somewhere, Kalec thought. The answers that he so desired looked to be just beyond the nearby rocks, answers that might end his curse. A hiss arose from the direction in which Malygos had flown. Kalec's protests went unheard as his host immediately reacted. Although it was only a hiss, Malygos knew who had spoken, knew all too well. There was no glimpse of Coros, but Malygos was certain he had heard his rival near. Kalec's host leapt into the air to give chase, then hesitated as memory of the mysterious figure resurfaced. To Kalec's relief, Malygos looked back. But of the figure there was no sign. It did not reappear anywhere. That decided it for Malygos, if not Kalec. Coros was again the subject of his hunt. Malygos's rival had to be very near. A proto-dragon of Coros's coloring briefly rose above the hill ahead, then dived down. Malygos dropped to just a few yards above the ground. A sulfuric scent assailed him as he neared the area. Malygos was not familiar with this region, but he knew of some such regions. The world was unstable there, sometimes as violent as a beast. After landing against the hillside, Malygos drew to the top. He heard voices, one of them that of his rival. The proto-dragon bristled at the sound.
"He comes here! Always comes here!" snapped Coros. "We should not be here!" protested one of his followers. The protest was followed by a snarl and a whine. As Malygos thrust his head over, he saw Coros looming above the proto-dragon who had complained. That proto-dragon now had a long, bloody gash across his forehead. Nearby, one of the others watched the pair with some trepidation. Of the fourth there was no sign. "We will live!" Coros sneered. "They will die! All will die! We will live!" The other two nodded. As they did, all three took turns looking to the north. Malygos also looked there and saw a dark, massive shape forming on the horizon. "He comes!" Coros hissed triumphantly. "Coros called him, and he comes! Galakrond comes!" Galakrond! Malygos stiffened, and Kalec would have done the same if it had been possible. Coros had summoned Galakrond? Malygos and Kalec had expected treacherous behavior from Malygos's rival, but neither had thought that Coros would have the audacity to reach out to Galakrond on his own. This could have nothing to do with either Ysera's hope or Talonixa's plan, except to bring ruin to both. Malygos cautiously wended his way down the hillside and away from Coros as quickly as he could. The proto-dragon's mind raced as he tried to decide what to do. This was beyond the sort of plotting that even Malygos would have anticipated from his rival- There came an angry hiss from behind him. As Malygos started to turn, another proto-dragon-the missing fourth-crashed into him. Malygos tumbled and plunged through what had initially appeared to be solid ground. The proto-dragon battled to free himself but succeeded only in becoming more mired in the soft, hot, and sticky tar previously hidden under a thin layer of normal dirt. Gasping for air, Malygos managed briefly to push himself to the surface. As he did, he and Kalec saw two things. One was the fourth proto-dragon vanishing over the hill toward where Coros and the other two waited for Galakrond.
The second was a short, so very short, glimpse of the hooded form peering down at the struggling Malygos just before the ground again swallowed him up. Kalec watched as the world vanished in darkness. Yet this time, it was the smothering darkness of the tar pit engulfing not only his host but also Kalec, who, despite his every effort, could not wake.



ONE PATH OF HORROR
 
Jaina Proudmoore left her meeting with the Council of Six with the subjects of that convocation only briefly still her focus. Her thoughts quickly turned to a more personal matter, one that had intruded more than once during the gathering. Kalec. Even before his recent odd-no, unsettling-behavior had begun, he had filled her thoughts more often than not. Jaina still vividly remembered that kiss just after he had asked if he stood a chance not only with the other magi but, more important, with her. She had answered him by lifting her face toward him, and he had responded as she had long hoped. At that moment, all had seemed right with the world. But since his troubled departure, things had gone awry . . . and now this had happened. While Jaina knew that she could not take time away from her duties for a personal matter, Kalec was still the former Aspect of Magic and thus privy to many of the secrets gathered by him and his predecessor-especially his predecessor-over the countless millennia. A wealth of magical power that could potentially wreak havoc upon the world was under his control, control that was slipping more and more with each passing day. It behooved her for that reason-so the archmage convinced herself-to find out what was wrong with him. But he cuts contact off each time I try to find out more. Simply reaching out to him was not enough. If she wanted to find out what was actually happening, the archmage had to take a different course of action, and in her eyes, there was only one course. Suddenly eager to return to her sanctum, Jaina picked up her pace. She already had a plan formulating, one that made absolute sense to her. And one that Kalec would probably not like in the least. •   •   • He was suffocating. Kalec was suffocating. It mattered not that it was the Malygos of the far, far past who was actually the one struggling for breath; Kalec experienced everything that the protodragon did, and that made him wonder at that dark moment what would
happen if Malygos perished. A part of Kalec knew that such a fate had not befallen his host, but another part of him-the part that most dealt with the immediate lack of air-still questioned whether both of them might yet die. Malygos shuddered as he sank deeper into the cloying tar into which he had been pushed. Kalec expected the proto-dragon to black out, but instead, Malygos startled his unfelt companion by exhaling what air was left in his lungs. But what at first Kalec took for suicide was instead the proto-dragon's attempt to save himself. Head pointed up, Malygos used his last breath to unleash frost. The force of his icy exhalation not only cleared the area above his head all the way up but also cooled the sides of the gap solid. Sucking in the air that filled the narrow passage, the proto-dragon bent his head down and exhaled again. The molten ground froze just enough, exactly as Malygos intended. He broke free and immediately shoved himself up. Below, both Kalec and his host could already sense the ground shifting again. Malygos pressed harder. The passage was too narrow for him to twist his head down and exhale again. If he was to escape, he had to move even faster. The opening beckoned. At the same time, a rumble rose from below. Hissing, the proto-dragon dug in his claws and pushed up the last few yards. He thrust his head out of the passage, then dragged the rest of himself free. The rumble grew thunderous. Although still fighting for breath, Malygos whirled around and exhaled at the opening. The frost covered the hole just as it filled. The ground sealed. Malygos spread his wings and took to the sky as the frozen pit shook. He rose higher and higher, both he and Kalec hoping that the freeze would last long enough - The pit exploded. A molten column shot up into the sky. Malygos managed to dodge the column just before it reached him. He flew as hard as he could in the direction he faced, even though it meant heading in the opposite direction from where he wanted to go. Only when the proto-dragon hoped he was far enough away did he look back. The column appeared to veer toward him but at last seemed unable to hold together anymore. It collapsed, spilling over the area of the pit and far beyond. Exhausted, Malygos alighted on a ridge and tried to focus. Taking a deep breath, he exhaled over his body, freezing the tar in most places. That done,
the proto-dragon shook hard, sending much of the stiffened tar scattering. The effort cost him, though, and he had to use a few more precious minutes to recoup. Kalec felt every bit of his host's weariness . . . and the protodragon's increasing impatience. Malygos wanted to follow after Coros, but he still needed to regain his breath. That meant he would risk losing his rival's trail. As good a tracker as Malygos was, the stench of this region mostly masked the other proto-dragon's scent, very likely what Coros had intended. His breathing finally regular again, Malygos leapt into the sky and headed in the general direction of his rival. There was, of course, no sign of the four, but Malygos pushed on. He constantly smelled the air, seeking some hint of any of the other proto-dragons. But it was another scent that finally seized his attention and gave him a possible trail. It also presented him with the choice of fleeing to safety or racing toward the jaws of death. Galakrond was somewhere far ahead. Part of Malygos shrieked that he should turn back-a part that Kalec found quite sensible-but another part urged the proto-dragon on. Malygos recalled what Coros had said about Galakrond. If Coros had come this far, he would not stop until he achieved his goal. And if that happened, the other proto-dragons would become easy prey for Galakrond and his new followers. Malygos flew low and fast, eyes now seeking any object in the sky. Aware of how swiftly Galakrond himself could fly, Malygos knew that he would have very little chance of escape should the gargantuan proto-dragon spot him. Everything Malygos planned revolved around seeing the behemoth first. Kalec searched his host's mind for details of what he planned and quickly discovered that Malygos's strategy consisted mostly of finding Galakrond and taking it from there. While Kalec was well aware of how adaptable the future Spell-Weaver could be, seeking out the monster terrorizing the land was, to the blue dragon, insane. However, as always, the choice was not Kalec's. He could only pray that history would be as he recalled it-and he was questioning those recollections more and more with each vision-and that Malygos would survive. Survival did not seem a trait of his host, as the proto-dragon pushed harder and harder, almost as if eager to confront Galakrond face to face. The landscape changed more than once as Malygos followed the behemoth's odd
and unnerving scent. In addition, the fresher the trail, the more Malygos began to notice the wrongness in that scent. There was a sense of decay, as if Galakrond himself were dead and yet was not. Moreover, there was something else inherent in the scent that to the proto-dragon felt twisted, frightening. Evil was not a concept understood much by Malygos's race, but Kalec recognized that it was that very notion that his host sought. Whatever Galakrond had once been-and Malygos's memories indicated a past in which the leviathan had been thought of as almost benevolent-he had crossed to a darker path at some point. Much like Deathwing, Kalec thought with growing horror. But in some ways worse and more primal. Why this had never been passed on to the blue's own kind plagued Kalec despite his own trials. What had made the original Aspects and the other first dragons agree to keep this terrible era a secret from the generations to come? Malygos came to a sudden halt. Kalec belatedly sensed that mixed in with Galakrond's ever-fresher scent was a trace of another scent Malygos recognized. Not Coros but one of those with him. The blue-and-white protodragon banked, following that scent. Although the essence of Galakrond still prevailed, the other scent began to take on more freshness. Other smells joined it, among them Coros's. Then another, fouler odor caught Malygos's attention. He immediately descended. A pair of undead proto-dragons dropped down from high above. Their claws just missed rending Malygos's wings. With ragged hisses, they pursued him to the ground. Through his host's eyes, Kalec sought out someplace from which to better defend himself-only to bitterly recall that he was not in command of the body he inhabited. Had he been, a natural stone arch to the west would have been his choice of destination. Malygos headed for the arch. Kalec could not be at all certain whether Malygos had made the same choice on his own or whether the proto-dragon and he somehow had been for a moment as one. Kalec settled for hoping that the arch would prove the correct decision. The two undead were right on their tail and gaining. Malygos darted through the arch, then immediately rose. Spinning in the air, the proto-dragon landed hard, paws first, on the arch. Kalec felt every bone shake from the impact and hoped that his host had not badly injured
himself. The arch collapsed. Tons of rock rained down as the two undead, relentlessly pursuing, passed underneath. The rubble pressed the foremost pursuer to the ground below, where it reduced the corpse to pulp. The collapse did not entirely catch the second undead, but it did throw the fiend out of control. The animated corpse crashed into one of the fragmented arch walls. Already inhaling, Malygos dived after his pursuer. As the undead attempted to right itself, Malygos unleashed the frost. The undead's movements slowed. Malygos increased his velocity. He tore into the fiend before it could recover from the blast, biting into the throat and tearing at the chest. The dry scale and flesh gave way easily, but that did not mean that the corpse ceased its assault on Malygos. The effects of the frost faded. Even with its throat nearly torn out, the undead tried to bite into Malygos's wing. Claws sought his own throat. Thrusting his head into the chest cavity, the proto-dragon clamped down and ripped out everything he could. As he pulled out, the upper part of the body collapsed into the ruined chest. The undead's flailing head snapped up. Malygos finished decapitating the creature, letting the head fall to the side. The ravaged body continued awkwardly seeking him. The proto-dragon shifted, and the body stumbled past. But as Malygos did that, a sharp pain coursed through his left hind paw. He roared in anguish as he fought to shake free the tightened jaws of the head. Blood poured from where several teeth had punctured the protodragon's hide. Seizing the jaws, Malygos finally pried them loose. He threw the head as far away as he could. His injured paw throbbed. Blood continued to flow. Malygos studied the wounds, then carefully exhaled. A finer stream of frost blanketed the injured area. The coolness eased the throbbing and helped slow the blood flow, which finally stopped on its own a few moments later. Kalec felt the pain every bit as much as Malygos did. As it was, he was grateful for whatever the coolness did to ease matters. The wind coursed through the region. Malygos sniffed the air. Both noted the clear scent of Coros and some of his followers. Why they had diverged
from their pursuit of Galakrond, neither Kalec nor his host could say, but the two were of one mind in wanting to find out. Not desiring to fall prey to another trap, Malygos took a circuitous route that also prevented his own scent from drifting back to his enemies. As the proto-dragon neared, a new, very powerful scent joined that of Coros and the others. The scent of blood. Very fresh blood. That disturbing scent was followed by the snarling voice of Coros. What the other proto-dragon said was not clear, but he was obviously angry. With great caution, Malygos peered around the rocks. His eyes widened. Coros and his followers were not alone. Between them lay a juvenile male of Alexstrasza's family. There were also two more members of Coros's family, one of them a female slightly smaller than the group's leader. She had a look of sly pride on her countenance that appeared to both Malygos and Kalec to have nothing to do with Coros's anger, which was evidently focused on two of the other males. "Do it!" their leader growled. "Must be done this way! Galakrond did it this way!" The juvenile tried to rise, then slumped. His savage wounds now revealed themselves. His chest had been torn open and his wings ripped apart. Malygos's gaze shifted to the new pair, where he saw that both had claws stained crimson. "Brought him here for you!" interjected the female, taking up Coros's cause. "Now eat!" Malygos recoiled, and if Kalec could have done the same, he would have. Neither could believe what he had heard. The other proto-dragons remained hesitant. The female looked at Coros, who hissed. In doing so, Coros revealed that his teeth were as red as her claws. Without warning, she lunged at the wounded juvenile's throat. As the other males except for Coros recoiled with as much shock as Malygos had, the female ripped out a monstrous chunk of flesh from the side. With great gusto, she tossed it up, then let it fall into her gullet. She swallowed it whole and sneered at the rest of the party. Malygos wanted to go to the aid of the juvenile but knew not only that it was already too late but also that he would simply be throwing his own life away. Kalec understood that but suddenly wished that he stood beside his
host. The two of them together could have taken Coros and his party, of that he was certain. And yet he could do nothing more than Malygos, who shared his frustration and horror at watching the butchery. One of the hesitant males finally lunged. He ripped a mass of flesh from one of the juvenile's arms. As he swallowed it, the rest finally joined in. The feast proved too much even for the stalwart Malygos. He turned away and quietly retched. Kalec experienced every raw emotion as Malygos fought to come to grips with the atrocity Coros had led his followers to perpetrate. Proto-dragons did not devour proto-dragons. Yes, they tasted the blood of their rivals in duels, but even when a duel ended in death, it did not continue with the consuming of the dead. Not, at least, until Galakrond. Malygos stiffened. Galakrond. Neither Kalec nor his host could have imagined the situation worse than it was, but now it came to both of them that what Coros intended was for him and his followers to become like Galakrond. Shuddering, Malygos forced his gaze back to the scene. The fire-orange juvenile had mercifully died and no longer suffered as bite after bite was ripped from him. Coros's followers quickly left little beyond bones and torn skin. It was Coros who brought an end to the hideous tableau. Muzzle soaked, he raised the ruined head by the jaw and tossed it aside. "Done! All done! We grow stronger! We see it soon!" "Soon!" the female echoed. "Soon!" the others repeated. Coros stretched his wings. "Now . . . now you see how Galakrond will not eat us! We are like Galakrond! We will be with him! He will not eat us now!" This encouraged even the most reluctant of his followers. The gathered proto-dragons raised their heads and hissed as one. Coros then took off, the female immediately joining him. The rest followed, leaving in their windy wake the jumbled remains of their victim. Malygos almost gave chase but suddenly found himself drawn to the ravaged corpse. The pungent odor of a fresh kill filled his nostrils. For reasons clear to neither Malygos nor Kalec, the proto-dragon bent to investigate the grisly pile. Kalec's host sniffed the juvenile's remains and then, on impulse, seized one of the bones in his jaws.
Barely had Malygos done so than the proto-dragon spit the bone out. Even then, though, there was a desire to take it or another piece and work what fragments of meat remained off of it and into his gullet. Both Kalec and his host recoiled at the idea, yet Malygos had to fight hard to pull back from the corpse. Hunger filled him, a hunger that revolved around more than merely the eating of flesh. Malygos yearned to taste something else, something that Kalec first recognized. Malygos hungers for the juvenile's lingering life essence. The blue dragon could feel the proto-dragon straining not to tear at the remnants in search of what little had not faded away. Stifling a roar of anger, Malygos turned and flew from the spot. At first, he simply flew as far as he could from the corpse, even though that took him in the wrong direction. Only after the wind in his face cooled Malygos enough did the proto-dragon finally arc back toward the path Coros's band had taken. Their scents were strong, but both Malygos and Kalec noted something different. A hint of the wrongness that pervaded wherever Galakrond flew now tinged their spoor. It stirred the disquieting desire in Malygos again, but Kalec's host fought it down, although the strain was greater this time. Malygos picked up his pace. Kalec understood that the proto-dragon still did not know what he would do, but he at least had to find out what happened when Coros made his offer to Galakrond. Images of Coros leading the other proto-dragons into a trap where Galakrond would then devour them all flashed through Malygos's-and also Kalec's-mind over and over. A flash of blue-green below caught Malygos's attention. The sharp-eyed proto-dragon spotted movement near a small creek. While Kalec tried to make sense of what his host saw, Malygos landed a short distance away from what he had seen. A rasping sound echoed from ahead. Malygos crept toward it. Something gulped a great amount of water. Seconds later, Kalec saw through Malygos's eyes the familiar figure of one of Coros's family. While Kalec had no idea which of the band this was, his host recognized the male as among those most hesitant to partake of the gruesome repast. The other proto-dragon did not look very well. His eyes had turned a pale yellow, and his breathing was ragged. He swallowed another mouthful of water, then coughed up half of it, along with some undigested flesh. Malygos's stomach churned in turn. Perhaps he made some noise or movement that neither he nor Kalec noticed, for suddenly, the other male
whirled in his direction. With a savage hiss, the blue-green proto-dragon lunged at Malygos. The sickened male moved with a speed his condition belied, falling upon Malygos. Kalec's host barely pulled back enough to keep from having his throat ripped out. His attacker fought with an almost mindless fury that more than made up for any cunning. The slavering maw seemed everywhere. How Malygos managed to avoid being slaughtered, neither Kalec nor his host could fathom, and yet the icy-blue male succeeded, if barely. Within seconds, Malygos sported a half-dozen slashes, fortunately none of them more than superficial. But the number of wounds and the strain of the struggle began to stir anew the throbbing where the undead had bitten Malygos. The proto-dragon's head pounded. Kalec felt the intelligent, adaptable Malygos give way to a beast as unthinking as the one that attacked him. A beast that struck with more rage than the sickened male. Now it was Malygos who bit and tore and ripped mercilessly. His great hind claws cut deep scarlet ribbons in his opponent's hide. His smaller forepaws clung tightly to the other male, keeping Malygos's foe where he desired him. Even when the second male finally began to try to pull away, Malygos gave no quarter. Kalec could only watch in growing dread as his host fell upon his weakening adversary. Spittle dripped from Malygos's jaws as he loomed over the other proto-dragon. Malygos was eager for the kill, eager for that and for something else that Kalec only now recognized but could not stop. With one last lunge, Malygos bit through his opponent's throat, tearing off almost half of it in his frenzy. Yet he did not simply toss it aside, as Kalec hoped, but rather eagerly threw it above his head in order to swallow it. However, as he caught it in his gullet, Malygos came to his senses. Hacking, Kalec's host disgorged the gobbet of flesh. The proto-dragon stumbled back, as dismayed as Kalec at what he had been about to do. The bite from the undead pounded harder than ever. Malygos glared at it, then stared wide-eyed. Within, Kalec also realized what had overcome his host. The bite had infected Malygos, urged him toward the same foul course that Galakrond followed, the same course that Coros now also desired to pursue. And although Malygos continued to fight the desire, it remained strong.
The nearby body, still fresh, radiated traces of the victim's life essence, which continuously enticed the proto-dragon. With an anxious hiss, Malygos launched himself after Coros again. The proto-dragon concentrated as hard as he could on his rival and the expected encounter with Galakrond. Malygos dared not think of anything else. But Kalec was thinking long and hard, making a further connection that his host had not. A single bite had nearly driven Malygos beyond saving. How many other proto-dragons had been bitten? How many others would be? And how many of those bitten would fail to fight off the effects as Malygos had done so far, paving the way for a tableau of horror even greater than Coros's betrayal portended?
TWO THE BETRAYERS
 
Time had come to have little meaning for Kalec anymore-at least, the more he remained caught up in the past. Indeed, as things progressed here, he felt less inclined to return to his own era. Even though he was but an unnoticed, incorporeal companion to the young Malygos, Kalec could not help but feel as if, in some ways, he now had more purpose here. He experienced all Malygos did-both good or ill-and the two progressively appeared in harmony when it came to the proto-dragon's course of action. We are becoming one, Kalec finally decided, as Galakrond's growing stench gave every evidence of the gargantuan beast's nearing presence. Not at all disturbed by the esoteric path his thoughts were taking, Kalec urged Malygos to use greater speed, and Malygos did just that. Yet with Kalec's increasing satisfaction at his growing part in these visions, there also came the determination that Galakrond and the corruption he spread had to be stopped. Kalec no longer felt certain just how the future was supposed to turn out; it was possible that the Azeroth he knew was only a delusion of his own mind. Galakrond must be stopped, Kalec kept insisting to himself, that mission more real to him at the moment than his own life. Galakrond . . . and Coros. Malygos suddenly dived for the ground. At the same time, through his eyes, Kalec caught a glimpse of Coros and the others rising higher into the sky just ahead. Kalec could only assume that the band had paused for some reason before continuing on. And even though Malygos reacted quickly, the female with Coros turned her head back as if sensing something. Belatedly, both Kalec and his host realized that she looked for the missing member of their party. Unfortunately, instead, she had discovered their lone pursuer. There was no need to hear the sharp cry to know that she warned Coros and the rest. Malygos continued to descend until he was just feet above the ground. The tips of his wings scraped the rough soil more than once as he sought out some cover. He darted through a narrow pass, gaze constantly judging which of the various pathways ahead might be the best. He veered through one after another, risking a glance back and above whenever it was
safe for even a moment to do so. And so he did not see Coros come at him from around the next bend. The other proto-dragon rammed into Malygos. The pair crashed into one of the rock walls. Malygos gasped as the air was forced from his lungs. He tried to regain his breath, but Coros shoved his hind paws deep, keeping Kalec's host from inhaling. A second attacker-the female-dropped down on Malygos, pushing him to the ground. She and Coros sought his throat. The land shook. Rock and earth tumbled down on the three. Malygos, nearly on his back, received the brunt of the collapse. Coros and the female thrust themselves away, vanishing behind the falling debris. A heavy rock pinned Malygos's wing. He struggled at first, then swung his body over the trapped appendage. The pain in twisting shook Kalec and his host hard, but it enabled the proto-dragon finally to slide the rock off despite the continued deluge. It seemed forever before Malygos managed to draw a breath, even if it was filled with dust that made him choke. Malygos immediately exhaled, sending a strong wave of frost above him. It slowed the collapse, giving him a few vital seconds to cover himself better with his wings and take another breath. The collapse at last ended. Malygos struggled to free himself but at first could barely breathe, much less move. The frost he had exhaled had begun to break up, and more rock threatened to come down. It was clear to both that they needed to push free fast. While Malygos's forepaws were small in comparison with the hind ones, they still had strength enough to help him claw forward until his larger appendages could better push him on. With his snout, the proto-dragon shoved the rocks ahead. The stones shifted around him. He managed to shove another rock aside, and a puff of air touched his nostrils. With more effort, Malygos kicked himself toward the small gap. His head thrust through, and for a moment, he hesitated, certain that Coros was waiting for just this to happen. But when his rival did not snap his head off, Malygos dug himself out the rest of the way. His wing now vied with his leg for which pained him more, but a short test proved the former was still functional. The collapse had left his hearing all but gone for the time being. He could not make any sense of what was happening except for what he saw and felt- which was more than enough, considering the second tremor that forced him
to retreat from his location. As Malygos paused again, his hearing slowly returned. Both he and Kalec heard what sounded like either thunder or another tremor beginning, only to realize that, instead, they were hearing the wary rumble of a very large creature. It was then that Kalec and his host understood that what they had both taken for the shifting of the ground had been the simple landing of Galakrond. With the utmost caution, Malygos wended his way up. He could hear another voice then, the voice of Coros. "Many will be there! All waiting like grazers to be eaten!" "So very many . . ." Each word Galakrond spoke reverberated in Malygos's still-tender ears. It was doubtful to both him and Kalec that Galakrond could speak at anything less than a roar. "We will feast well!" Coros assured him. "We will grow strong!" Malygos carefully poked his head over the edge. Coros obviously assumed that he was buried beneath tons of rubble, but the icy-blue proto-dragon remained wary of sentinels arranged just in case some other foolish creature dared spy on Galakrond. Indeed, through his host, Kalec observed at least one of Coros's band clearly acting as a lookout, although, fortunately, not glancing Malygos's way at that moment. Coros and the female hovered before Galakrond, who appeared larger than ever to Malygos and Kalec. Even more disturbing was that the various protuberances pockmarking the behemoth's skin were more distinct than before. Full limbs dangled everywhere. There were even wings that fruitlessly flapped, as if seeking to lift Galakrond in the air. But most disturbing were the eyes. Scattered about, the singular orbs stared with the same malevolent intent as the two original ones now fixed upon Coros and the female. The scores of extra eyes blinked randomly, as if each was from an individual and not part of the same beast. One of the nearest turned its baleful gaze toward Malygos. He ducked immediately. The icy-blue male held his breath and waited. There was no outcry from Galakrond, though. The only sounds were the voices of Coros and the female. Still full of trepidation, Malygos raised his head again. The eye now looked past him to the small band facing the gargantuan fiend. "Great Galakrond will lead us!" Coros continued almost gleefully. "Great Galakrond will rule all!"
This Coros is mad! Kalec thought, well aware that Malygos thought the same of his rival. Still, they both saw that Galakrond listened with interest to the words. "Where will they gather?" Galakrond finally asked Coros. "The jagged valley! Soon!" Although Kalec did not recognize the description, Malygos evidently did. His low hiss marked the truth of Coros's words and the depths of the other proto-dragon's betrayal. "I know this place," Galakrond remarked, his gaze looking inward. "Hunted there when I was small . . . when I was nothing. . . ." "But you are great now!" said the female, the others adding their agreement with a chorus of hisses. Some of the vestigial limbs twitched, paws snatching as if seeking prey. Several more of the eyes followed Galakrond's gaze. "Great I am," the gigantic fiend rumbled. He studied Coros in particular. "You would be great, too." "Not so great as Galakrond!" Malygos's rival immediately replied, as the female swiftly nodded her agreement. "Not so great as Galakrond!" "No . . . never so great as me. . . ." Galakrond stretched his wings, which quickly shadowed the land for some distance. One forepaw-small in comparison with the rest of him but far larger than the full form of any normal proto-dragon-scraped at the hard ground, ripping through stone as if it were sand. "There can be only one me. . . ." An unsettled expression fell over the lookout's countenance. He suddenly took to the sky. Malygos and Kalec both believed that they had been discovered, but instead, the lookout continued higher and higher as fast as he could. There was no doubt now that he was abandoning the others. The fleeing proto-dragon raced off, vanishing into the distance. And at the same time, Galakrond roared and rose into the air just above Coros and the rest of his band. Coros and the female leapt back as the darkness that Galakrond's vast shape created now enshrouded them. The remaining two members of Coros's band sought escape but in doing so only drew Galakrond's attention to them. Despite the speed with which they flew, it was easy for the behemoth to catch up to them. The smaller proto-dragons separated, but even that was not good enough. As Galakrond banked toward one, he brought his wing around. The massive appendage swept up the second of Coros's followers.
Coros and the female took flight, heading over where Malygos hid. In their haste, they did not notice Malygos, who remained flattened against the shielding ground. Shrieks filled the air. Malygos dared to peer over. The proto-dragon caught up in Galakrond's wing had now been tossed up before him. With an eager roar, Galakrond swallowed his victim. The monstrous proto-dragon's remaining prey used his comrade's doom to try to slip past the leviathan. He darted to the left side of Galakrond's head and continued to the shoulder. One of the extra limbs seized the fleeing proto-dragon's wing. The male let out a frightened squawk as the paw held him. Galakrond shook, letting the paw toss its victim forward. The shrieking male vanished down Galakrond's gullet. Barely had the monster finished when he veered toward Malygos. Kalec felt the urge to seek escape fill his host, but somehow Malygos kept his position. The wisdom of that decision revealed itself a moment later, as Galakrond soared over and past him. The ease with which the gigantic proto-dragon had taken his other prey meant that neither Coros nor the female had gotten very far. Kalec and his host could still make out both tinier proto-dragons desperately trying to keep the gap between Galakrond and them from closing. However, a few flaps of Galakrond's wings brought him right behind the pair. Without warning, Coros rammed the female in the side. She lost control, her speed faltering in the process. He's sacrificing her for his own hide! Kalec realized, both he and Malygos stunned at the betrayal. The female righted herself just in time to see Galakrond almost upon her. In desperation, she exhaled. However, what worked well against a foe the size of Malygos only futilely draped one of the behemoth's huge yellowed fangs. Galakrond swallowed her without even slowing in his pursuit of Coros. Malygos's rival strained to keep ahead, but even his treachery with his own family could not keep him from Galakrond's endless hunger. The mighty jaws opened wider. In what seemed madness to the onlookers, Coros abruptly turned directly toward the gaping maw. But before the jaws could shut, Coros darted up and attacked the underside of Galakrond's mouth. Claws tore at the softer,
unprotected flesh. Galakrond reared back. Neither Malygos nor Kalec believed that Coros had actually hurt Galakrond, but the attack had certainly caught him by surprise. Coros used that surprise to begin his flight anew. With a swiftness that even Malygos could not have matched, the blue-green dived toward the ground, where he maintained his tremendous velocity despite having to navigate one change in terrain after another. Galakrond pursued. Malygos finally rose from his hiding place, which gave him one last glimpse of hunter and prey. And in that moment, he and Kalec both saw that despite Coros's cunning, Malygos's rival could not escape. Keeping low briefly kept Galakrond from easily snapping him up, but a rise in the land finally forced the speeding Coros to overestimate his path. Momentum sent him high above the security of the ground, and the leviathan swallowed him whole. The abruptness with which Malygos's rival perished did not in the least disturb Kalec's host. Both had seen that all that mattered to Coros in the end was his own existence, not even that of those closest to him. Malygos's only concern was that Galakrond would suddenly turn about and spot him before he could make his escape. Fortunately, Galakrond instead alighted in a vast plain farther ahead. The macabre behemoth landed with as heavy a thud as earlier, sending a tremor through the region. Quickly descending again, Malygos waited. Galakrond settled his head on the ground. A few moments later, a low, steady rumble escaped the enormous proto-dragon. When the rumble continued, Malygos dared to take off again. How long Galakrond would rest, neither Kalec nor Malygos could guess, but the icyblue proto-dragon could not assume that he would have much time. Following Coros's tactics, Malygos kept low as he flew with as much speed as he could muster. Even when the rumbling faded into the distance, Kalec's host did not slow. One notion began dominating the proto-dragon's thoughts, and thus Kalec's. While Coros had paid for his betrayals, he had still in the end performed one more misdeed. Galakrond knew where Talonixa had the others gathering for her charge. As suicidal as the female's plan seemed to both Malygos and Kalec, at least it offered some chance. However, if
Galakrond struck while they were still coming together, there would be utter disaster. The proto-dragon pushed harder. If Malygos could warn Talonixa before Galakrond awoke-and if he could make the female listen-then there was hope. Renewed rumbling sent Malygos dropping, but almost immediately, he recognized the sound as thunder, not Galakrond. The exhausted proto-dragon finally paused in his flight. The effort thus far had taken a lot out of even the sturdy Malygos. It started to rain. The storm was not a strong one, but there was the fear that if the rain continued on its present course, it would soon reach Galakrond. If it woke him, he might decide to fly in Malygos's direction- Kalec's world turned upside down. The vertigo struck him as if he were experiencing it for the first time. To his surprise, the blue dragon found himself struggling to remain with his host. He could identify with this battle for survival more than with the growing number of questions that represented his existence in the present. And yet, as ever, Kalec had no choice. Malygos and the past vanished . . . and Kalec awoke on his back and in half-elven form somewhere in the Nexus. There was no immediate hint to how much time, if any, had passed. It was dark, and that also disturbed Kalec, since there should have been some illumination. Rising from the floor, he summoned a sphere of light. He bared his teeth in frustration as he discovered that his surroundings were not where he had last been standing but rather a chamber deeper in the Nexus. He looked around, seeing nothing but emptiness. Even the artifact was nowhere to be seen, not that the fact encouraged him at all. By this point, he knew that it mattered not where the physical form of the relic sat; its power could reach him anywhere- Kalec spun around. For a moment, for just the briefest of moments, he thought that someone had been standing behind him. Someone wearing a voluminous cloak and hood. But a short search of the passage in that direction revealed nothing. Still, Kalec found himself drawn that way and continued on. As he moved, the former Aspect wished that somehow he could just return to the young Malygos. Better the sanity that the madness of the past brought him than the madness his own era offered.
Yet despite his growing willingness to accept what the artifact appeared to be demanding of him, he remained conscious. His disappointment was magnified by the fact that he was nearing his original location without having discovered any reason for the feeling that he had again been watched. But just before he would have entered, he sensed the presence of another. Whoever he was kept himself well cloaked from most magi's abilities but not Kalec's yet considerable powers. He could not tell who or what had invaded the Nexus, but the intruder was very near. Kalec dismissed the sphere, then cautiously proceeded. A faint illumination immediately spread through the area around him. It was a sign that the Nexus still responded readily to his will, which gave him a formidable line of attack. Any thief seeking the Nexus's collection would soon rue the day. Shadows filled the great chamber, which seemed natural considering the faint illumination remaining, but there was a very slight wrongness to one area that made him wary- "Kalec? Are you there?" As the voice echoed through the chamber, the wrongness vanished. Instead, the Nexus alerted him to the obvious fact that someone he knew very well now called to him from the more accepted entrance to his sanctum. Someone who was none other than Jaina Proudmoore. He turned just as she entered. Jaina did not see him at first, but when she did, her expression went from open apprehension to relief. "There you are! Praise be! I was beginning to think you'd either left or . . ." Her voice trailed off without her explaining what fate she had imagined might have taken him, but Kalec did not care. There should have been no difference between seeing her actually standing before him and viewing her through the tear he had earlier created, but now the scents that Kalec had come to identify with Jaina and only Jaina reached the blue dragon. Even in his half-elven form, his senses were more acute than those of the being he resembled and, in this case, more acute than Jaina's. She did not know how she smelled to him . . . or how welcome those scents were to the former Aspect. "Forgive me," she went on at last, approaching him at the same time. "I tried to contact you again, and when I didn't even sense you, I finally had to travel here myself." His brow furrowed. Kalec was well aware just how much effort Jaina
would have had to put in to journey here so quickly. While a part of him was very grateful on a number of levels at this tremendous show of concern, he reminded himself of the potential danger facing her if she came into close contact with the artifact. Even if it only cast her mind into the visions, that might prove too much for her. The artifact had taken enough of a toll on him; while very powerful, she was still human. "You should not have concerned yourself, Jaina. I did hear you call to me, but I was in the midst of trying to revitalize some of the wards and could not risk halting the work at that point. I intended to contact you as soon as I could." "Kalec, you should really have some help, even if it's me and me alone." Kalec knew that even if he did agree to her aiding him, no good would come of it, especially for Jaina. He remembered too well the distrust with which some of the other magi had begun to look at their leader because of her growing relationship with a blue dragon. "I'm grateful for the depths of your concern," he began carefully, not only hoping to avoid offending her but also praying that the artifact would not choose this moment to cast him back. "But you have so many other matters you need to worry about. The others-" "I know about the others," Jaina interjected just a bit sharply. "I need no counsel from them regarding what I can and cannot do! They wanted me to be their leader; now they can accept my choices." For the moment, Kalec forgot his troubles. The last thing he wanted was for Jaina to jeopardize her position. In addition to his own concerns, he had hoped that by leaving, he would cause no more harm to the archmage. "But as leader, you also have responsibilities to your people," the blue dragon reminded her. "And I am not part of your people. I'm sorry I have added to your worries, Jaina. Please trust me that your place is with your own, not assisting me here." It came out colder than he had planned. Jaina's expression did not change, but there was a subtle shift in her gaze. Finally nodding, she looked away. "Perhaps you're right. Forgive me for being impetuous. I just had to come myself to see what was happening." Her eyes returned to his. "But I take your word that you're well, Kalec." He kept his own eyes steady despite the guilt growing within him. "All is well." He started to reach for her but put his hand down before she could notice the movement. "Thank you."
Where he had held back, Jaina chose to act. One slim hand touched his arm, remaining there long enough to make an unspoken point. Then the archmage stepped back and, with a brief smile, began her teleportation spell. When at last he was alone again, Kalec exhaled sharply. He hoped that Jaina would take to heart his reluctance to have her near and would not try to attempt any further contact. At least then, one fear of his would be no more. And as for the greatest of his fears, Kalec could think of only one course of action to take with the relic. While he could not yet prevent it from affecting him, he could make certain that it bothered no one else. That meant that more than ever, the wards had to be strengthened. At this point, no one-not even other blue dragons-could be allowed to enter the Nexus. Not until he had dealt with the situation. Kalec felt fortunate that Jaina had not come any earlier. If she had, she might have discovered the truth and endangered herself by trying to help him. The task giving him renewed focus, Kalec headed back to where he had been working when the visions had last taken him. He prayed that he would be given the time at least to do this, if not for himself, then for the sake of Jaina or anyone else who sought entrance to the Nexus. There was no hint of anything wrong when he arrived, for which he was grateful. He considered confronting the artifact first but chose to remain with his decision. If the powers of the relic were for the moment dormant, he preferred to keep it that way. Kalec prepared himself for his work just as he had before. The ley lines appeared before his veiled gaze. He began manipulating the power, growing more satisfied with each step he completed. Within minutes, the first ward had been strengthened enough that he decided to go on to the next. The second proved even quicker to fortify. Kalec felt a rare moment of pride. It had been a long time since he had accomplished anything. He reached for the third ward. There was something attached to its spellwork, something neither he nor any blue dragon had cast. The artifact's magic had insinuated itself in the ward. Kalec immediately withdrew for fear that he would stir up whatever the artifact intended. An unease crept over him, and he sought out the next ward. That, too, was now linked to the artifact. The former Aspect frowned, then returned his attention to the one he had just finished strengthening.
Like the others, it was also linked . . . linked when it had not been a few seconds before. Quickly dismissing the rest, he focused on the first and, not at all to his surprise, found that the artifact had also connected its power to that ward. The uneasiness swelled. Kalec took a deep breath, stepped back, and without hesitation, brought forth the entire array that formed the Nexus's network of defensive spells. The hiss that escaped him was far more suited to his draconic form than to the half-elven one he currently wore. The former Aspect glared. The power of the artifact was now a part of each and every ward in the Nexus.
THREE THE AFFLICTED
 
Jaina Proudmoore reappeared in her chambers, her exhaustion having more to do with Kalec than with her magical efforts. She knew that he was hiding much from her, and while she appreciated his obvious worry for her, she also resented it. Kalec was a blue dragon, and yes, that meant that he understood aspects of the magical arts in a way that even she did not, but Jaina also considered herself more than capable of facing most such situations and using human adaptability to ferret out solutions that perhaps a dragon might not think about. She summoned a chair to her. Taking a minute to gather her thoughts, the archmage relived her visit to the Nexus. With those thoughts came guilt of her own. She had held back some of the truth from Kalec, too. Jaina had not arrived just before he had noticed her; in fact, she was the one he had almost discovered. Only a quick manipulation of magic had enabled her to focus his attention elsewhere long enough for her to shift her location to where it would seem she had just entered the area. And even that might not have been necessary if Jaina had not been concerned that Kalec would realize just how long she had been there. Long enough to discover the relic. The archmage had no more precise name for it. Artifact. Relic. Jaina suspected that Kalec thought of it in the same terms. It was like nothing she had ever seen, and that included personal knowledge of a variety of powerful magical objects comparable to the collection stored in the Nexus. Yet if it was like nothing she had ever seen, it was not entirely a mystery to her. She did identify one significant factor, possibly something that even Kalec might not recognize. She had come across such spellwork in the past. Only twice and of a much lesser degree, but she had definitely seen its like before. It was a spellwork older than dragons, spellwork that bespoke of a unique knowledge lost to magi of her time. Spellwork that Jaina, at least, believed had ties to the legendary keepers or even the titans themselves. The archmage had certainly not journeyed to the Nexus with such a
discovery in her mind. All she had truly had to go on was her suspicion that there was something in the Nexus tied to Kalec's strange behavior. It had been her intention to speak with him and find an excuse while doing so to use her power surreptitiously to seek anything amiss. Jaina had believed that she could do this without even Kalec sensing it. And had that opportunity not presented itself, she had plotted other ways by which she would have had some time alone to try to decipher the truth. However, all of her planning had proved unnecessary, for there had been no hint of Kalec upon her arrival. The weakened wards had made it easy to gain entrance, and once she had verified that Kalec was nowhere to be seen, she had begun to investigate her surroundings. To her surprise, finding the relic had been quite easy. It had radiated a unique magical trace. In addition, it seemed that Kalec had not even bothered to secrete it in one of the many arcane prisons or other caches designed to hold such powerful magical items. The artifact had simply sat out in the open in the first major chamber she entered. Some might have been unnerved by the thing, but Jaina had only been fascinated. She studied its aura, admired its design, and delved as deeply as she cautiously could into its core. But in the end, Jaina had learned little. So significant was this find that she had actually considered taking the artifact with her, even despite the near disaster created by her intention to use another relic-the Iris-in revenge for Theramore's destruction by it at the hands of the orc Garrosh. However, before Jaina could bring herself to seize the artifact in the Nexus, the archmage had suddenly sensed Kalec nearby. Not sure how he would react to her obvious intrusion, Jaina had masked her presence as best she could, then worked to make certain that Kalec did not know she was there while she quickly shifted her location. Even then, he had almost noticed her. Yet if Jaina did not have the artifact with her to study, she did have access to other avenues that might give her a clue to what it was and how it might be related to the changes in Kalec's personality. Jaina was convinced that he was in desperate danger, perhaps not only to his mind but also to his body. Jaina summoned a thick silver tome from the highest shelf. As it neared her, the book opened, and pages began flipping. A narrowing of the archmage's eyes caused the pages to cease turning. With the book still hovering at reading level, she surveyed the contents. The archmage who had written these pages had marked the two items she
was particularly interested in as remnants of the period shortly after order had been brought to Azeroth. Jaina had sought these because something in the artifact's appearance had reminded her of something the archmage had read when first she had combed through this book for other reasons. To her frustration, the two pages before her presented Jaina with nothing. There were details of where the items had been found and who had been involved in discovering them. There were also notations on previous studies of the titans and keepers believed to have been identified as having influenced the regions where the finds had been made. While such notes were interesting to Jaina in a scholarly way, she sought more. The page turned. Theories about the titans and the keepers dominated, some concerning the extent of their ties to one another. Jaina started to skip farther ahead, then recalled something mentioned within the theories. She found it: . . . as the young mage Rulfo insisted. The vision he claimed to have had from touching it suggested keeper influence in its design. Archmage Theolinus had his own theory on keeper influence in other regions . . . Jaina let out a grunt of exasperation. She skipped down past theories that she normally would have had more interest in, hoping to find what she thought she recalled. "Ah!" The name Rulfo finally came up again. It had been so long since Jaina had read through this part that she could not remember what else Rulfo had told his masters about the vision, but surely it had to be in this section. But scarcely had she begun reading when the archmage stepped back in such shock that she accidentally canceled the spell holding the book in place. The ancient tome dropped with a loud thud on the floor, the pages now askew. Her heart pounding, Jaina knelt by the damaged book. Her concern was not for what she had allowed to happen to it but for rereading the passage. With a wave of her hand, the other pages flew by until the one she sought once again faced her. "Rulfo . . . Rulfo . . ." Jaina muttered, seeking his name. . . . Rulfo might have had the answer to that. His death is a sad footnote to an otherwise intriguing expedition into a study of the past . . . She had gone too far. The archmage went back a few paragraphs. Once there, Jaina read more carefully. . . . the third day after the find. An entire afternoon of searching revealed
nothing, not even with the finest spells at work. Only after dark, only when one last attempt was made, did someone find his body. "Body," Jaina murmured, praying that she had read wrong. According to reports, at first glance, the consensus was that he had somehow lost his way and fallen off the peak. Certainly, that explained how mangled Rulfo's corpse was said to be. However, later conversations by the representative of the Kirin Tor with those who knew him best give indication of a peculiar and sudden madness that descended upon Rulfo prior to his disappearance. The ultimate conclusion was that this vision the young mage mentioned was the start of his insanity. . . . It ended there, the next paragraph continuing on with matters Jaina found for the moment tedious. Still certain that she had read more than this previously, she desperately searched the succeeding pages but to no avail. She returned to the ones she had read and studied them closely, but quickly verified that she had missed nothing. And yet . . . somewhere she had read more. The archmage cast her eyes upon the many tomes, scrolls, journals, and other writings before her. Within one of them, the details she hunted for surely existed. She just had to recall which one or keep looking until she found what she sought. But staring at the imposing collection, the archmage wondered if after she managed to locate the information, it would already be too late for Kalec. •   •   • The artifact was as bound to the Nexus's wards as if it had been so set since the latter were first cast. Kalec doubted that Malygos could have weaved the accursed thing's power into the array with such mastery. It again bespoke the great skill of whoever had created the relic, a being the blue dragon could only assume was the cloaked and hooded form of which both he and the young Malygos had caught glimpses. A being Kalec had already come to hate deeply. For what seemed the hundredth time, Kalec followed a magical trail in the array in the hopes of finding some flaw that he could exploit. He did not want to leave the Nexus at the mercy of the artifact, even though thus far, it had done no visible harm to the place. Still, considering what it had done to Kalec, the blue did not want to take any chances- Tainted! Tainted! With a pained roar, Kalec pulled back from his work. He clutched his
head, trying to keep the voices at bay, but they shouted so loudly that all else was drowned out. Must destroy them! No! They are us! No! They ate one of us! The Nexus became a maelstrom. Kalec lost his balance, spun around, and fell. But before he could strike the floor, he suddenly hovered above the ground, surveying what appeared to be the start of a civil war among the proto-dragons Talonixa had gathered. At least seven individual combats caught his eye-or, rather, Malygos's eye-and one of them included both Neltharion and Nozdormu. Despite the fight being two against one, the pair was very tentative in its attacks against the silver-green female before them. She, on the other hand, snapped and clawed at them with abandon, eschewing tactics of any sort. As Malygos landed nearby, she lunged at Neltharion. Malygos knew well by now the charcoal-gray male's eagerness for battle and so was surprised when Neltharion sought desperately to avoid her sharp but smaller teeth. Neltharion scuttled back as the jaws neared his throat- -and Nozdormu leapt in at the perfect moment and tore out the preoccupied female's gullet. He struck so artfully that he had already withdrawn before the female even realized that she was mortally wounded. Her chest quickly soaking with her blood, the stricken proto-dragon started to turn toward Nozdormu, then fell on her face. As Kalec and his host struggled to make sense of events, the other seemingly mad proto-dragons were herded together. Some of those facing the prisoners appeared to be barely able to keep from trying to rip them apart. One of those preventing that was Ysera, who was issuing a warning. "Be careful! Watch teeth! Stay back!" Beyond the scene, Talonixa watched with an unreadable expression. Kalec wanted Malygos to keep an eye on her, but his host was more interested in what Ysera was attempting to do. The more the tableau unfolded, the more it appeared that Alexstrasza's sister was every bit as concerned for the afflicted as she was for those surrounding them. While both Malygos and Kalec could appreciate that she was trying to prevent further bloodshed among proto-dragons when the true threat was clearly Galakrond, the blue dragon and his host were in agreement that this
could not end well. The surrounded band snapped at their captors and seemed not to recognize those whom Malygos knew they should. Malygos noticed something about each of the captured proto-dragons. Every one of those whom the icy-blue male could see sported bite wounds from some previous but still recent fight. Bite wounds . . . Malygos started to glance down at his paw, only to be interrupted by Alexstrasza. The fire-orange female looked relieved to see him. "You live! We thought you dead!" "Almost. Coros . . . he is dead." Before he could relay to her the full tale and its import, Alexstrasza looked back at where her sister still worked to keep the two groups from converging on each other. "She does not understand! They must die! Even I know that!" That drew Malygos's attention from the need to tell his story. "Must die? Why?" "The bites . . . the bites of the not-living! They make a hunger . . . they make these want to eat one another! They make them like Galakrond!" Her words shook both Kalec and his host. Malygos could not keep from shivering as he remembered his struggles after being bitten. He looked past Alexstrasza to the maddened proto-dragons, recalling his own growing bloodlust and how he had barely kept from doing just as these apparently desired. Alexstrasza mistook his reaction for disgust at what the captives had turned into. She hissed. "Ysera thinks of our clutch brother. She thinks him out there still." This further dismayed Malygos. "Would be not-living!" "Clutch brother long dead," Alexstrasza reminded him. "Long dead when Malygos finds him . . ." That should have reassured him, but so many things had happened that even a clever proto-dragon, such as Malygos considered himself, had doubts. True, other old corpses had remained dead, at least, the last time Malygos had seen them. Now the icy-blue male wondered whether those corpses would still be there if he went to find them again. And then his thoughts returned to just how these other proto-dragons had been changed. They had all been bitten. They had all succumbed to the monstrous hunger that Malygos had fought more than once. Kalec sensed his host considering fleeing before someone recognized the
wound and added him to the mad. Still, Malygos held his ground and watched as the tableau played out. Talonixa finally acted, shoving past smaller proto-dragons to face Ysera and the afflicted. Despite their growing madness, the imprisoned protodragons remained cowed by the powerful female. "Kill them. . . ." "No! Must help them!" Ysera insisted, staring defiantly. "Kill them, or they bite us." As she spoke, Talonixa pressed Alexstrasza's sister back, forcing her closer to the mad. "They bite you. . . ." Whether a bite from one of the afflicted would affect a proto-dragon the way a bite from the undead did was a question Kalec doubted any there knew the answer to yet, but Talonixa's words stirred fear in several of those in attendance. Even Alexstrasza's sister looked uncertain. Without warning, one of the afflicted hissed and started toward Ysera. Before Alexstrasza could go to her sister's aid, Ysera, her uncertainty vanishing, turned her steady gaze on her would-be attacker. The madness faded somewhat. The other proto-dragon let his head drop low, then shuffled back. To Kalec, he seemed ashamed that he had tried to harm the smaller female. Ysera again faced Talonixa. "Must help them. . . ." "No time! We must fight Galakrond!" the larger female declared. She looked to those watching the argument. "We fight! Yes?" As they had before, the majority of the other proto-dragons hissed their agreement. Even in the face of such a lack of support, Ysera pressed. "These are us! These are us!" The gathering quieted. Alexstrasza's sister moved toward the crowd, beseeching. "These are us! We help them, we help us!" Some of those listening looked at one another in thought. Talonixa's eyes narrowed more. "Yes . . ." she hissed quietly, suddenly very agreeable. "Yes . . . we help them. . . ." Talonixa eyed the afflicted. "But must keep them safe. Must keep us safe. Help them when we can. . . ." She turned and studied the west. "Must keep them safe, yes. Come! Bring them!" Clearly confident that she would be obeyed, Talonixa took flight. Several of the proto-dragons surrounding the afflicted looked warily at Ysera. Alexstrasza's sister stared at them with defiance, then glanced at the
captured figures. "Come . . ." she murmured soothingly. "Come . . ." Slowly, Ysera rose into the air. As she did, she gestured with her head after Talonixa. The surrounded proto-dragons reluctantly followed Ysera. They were flanked by Talonixa's ardent supporters. The rest of the assembled protodragons looked more than willing to stay behind, but to Kalec's surprise, his host suddenly leapt after Ysera. Even Alexstrasza was not so swift. Out of the corner of Malygos's eye, Kalec saw Neltharion and Nozdormu follow suit. The scene abruptly shifted, but Kalec sensed that only a short time had passed. Now Talonixa led the band toward a narrow valley. "There!" she roared, indicating with a dip of her wing another pass. Talonixa descended. As the proto-dragons landed, the large female strode toward what initially looked simply like a rock wall. However, as they followed Talonixa around, a narrow crevice revealed itself. At first, Kalec thought it was the entrance to the cave from the one disturbing vision. However, almost immediately, too many details gave indication that it was otherwise. Still, Kalec could not help feeling that he knew the reason Talonixa had brought them to this place. "Why here?" Ysera asked with a hint of suspicion. "These ones you defend, they go in here and wait." The pale yellow female peered at the narrow entrance, her suspicion growing. "In there?" "All . . . or we must slay." The finality of her tone brooked no argument. With reluctance, Ysera at last nodded. "They stay here," Talonixa commanded. She indicated some of those guarding the afflicted. "Four here, they guard. Entrance narrow. Four enough." It was clear to Kalec and his host that Talonixa would have gladly had the afflicted slaughtered there and then, and Ysera obviously also saw that. She finally acquiesced, then led those she had championed toward the narrow entrance. One by one, the trusting proto-dragons entered the cave. Some had to struggle to get inside, so restrictive was the entrance. Ysera had to keep calming both those waiting to enter and those already inside. The last finally entered. Ysera backed away in order to let the guards take
their places. But as the first began to move, Talonixa rumbled, "Wait." Ysera hissed. Malygos and Neltharion started toward Talonixa, only to have some of the golden female's most ardent followers block their path. Talonixa exhaled. Lightning shot from her maw. Three bright silver bolts struck the rock face above the entrance. As that happened, a calm Talonixa fluttered back a few short yards. The entire rock face collapsed, spilling over the cave. Ysera leapt toward the avalanche, but before she could sacrifice herself in a vain attempt to save those within, Malygos lunged for her. To his surprise, Nozdormu reached her first, seizing one of her wings with his jaws and carefully but firmly pulling her back just before she would have been crushed to a pulp. Despite there being no doubt regarding Nozdormu's or Malygos's intentions, Ysera snapped at both of them. Her rage undiminished, she whirled on Talonixa. Four other proto-dragons blocked her path. Two opened their mouths, but Talonixa's hiss rose above the confrontation, stilling their attack. "It is done," she proclaimed, her massive wings stretched to enhance her size and, thus, her dominance. "No taint among us! All tainted must die!" Ysera exhaled. The two guards directly in front of her blinked and nearly collapsed. Stunned, they proved no impediment to her charge. She burst past them and sought Talonixa. But the larger female awaited this foolhardy act. She shifted as Ysera neared. Her long, powerful tail struck her much smaller adversary across the head with a loud crack. Alexstrasza rushed by Malygos and the others in time to reach her sister, just as Ysera fell back, stunned. The two crashed into each other, ending in a heap. "It is done," Talonixa repeated, acting as if she had not even noticed Ysera's impudence. "Come . . . must be ready for Galakrond. . . ." With that, Talonixa and all except for Malygos and his friends silently departed. The males moved in to aid the sisters, only to have Ysera roll to her feet and rush to the buried cave. Ignoring the small bits of stone and dirt still raining down, she used her hind paws to try to rip away at the tons of rock. However, as Ysera tore at the avalanche, additional stones loosened above. They fell down, not only more than replacing what she dug away but also
battering her enough that Alexstrasza, at last righted, risked injury to herself and pulled her struggling sibling to safety. "Save them!" the smaller sister insisted, her frantic gaze darting from Alexstrasza to the males. "They still live! Hear them!" Malygos listened but detected nothing. Yet both Kalec and his host-and also the other future Aspects-knew that Ysera spoke the truth. There was just nothing they could do. A hundred proto-dragons digging without pause would not have been able to reach those within in time. Malygos understood that as well as Kalec, and so did the rest, even Ysera. Still, despite her awareness of the futility of what she attempted, Ysera again rushed to the fall and tried digging. She kicked away rock after rock, only to have more fill the momentary gaps. The others finally shoved in front of Ysera and forced her away. She continued to stare at the buried entrance, and at one point, through Malygos's ears, Kalec heard her say, gasping, "Dralad . . ." After several tense moments, Alexstrasza's sister stilled. However, now there was a distant look in her eyes, as if her mind remained elsewhere. "We must go," Malygos at last suggested quietly. Neltharion added, "The hunt for Galakrond will begin soon! We must be there!" "The hunt for Galakrond?" Nozdormu mocked, startling both Malygos and Kalec by even speaking. From what Kalec gathered from his host, young Nozdormu spoke only when he seemed to have something significant to add. Otherwise, some might have taken him for one of the less advanced, more animalistic proto-dragons, unable to talk. "Hunted by, it will be." Yet, despite saying that, the brown male was the first to leap into the air. To the surprise of the rest, Ysera immediately followed. Alexstrasza joined her sister, leaving Malygos and Neltharion to find themselves bringing up the rear. However, as they ascended, Kalec-but not Malygos-noticed Ysera surreptitiously glancing back at the ruined cave, where some of the afflicted proto-dragons likely still struggled to survive before the air gave out. She then glanced at Malygos, but not directly at his face. Rather, Kalec noted that she eyed his lower leg. The same leg where the one undead had bitten Malygos's paw.
FOUR THE WATCHER
 
Kalec's view shifted again. Ahead of the five, Talonixa and her gathered host hovered in the air. He realized that they were already setting out to find Galakrond. Several of the other proto-dragons noted the small band's arrival, which in turn alerted Talonixa. She soared toward the five, her attendants flanking her. As Talonixa confronted Ysera and her companions, the attendants spread out in obvious battle formation. Malygos and the others instinctively did the same, even against the greater odds. "These can join the hunt," Talonixa decreed. "You, runt, will not." "I will come with!" Ysera insisted. "Why? Talk to Galakrond? Make a tiny bite for him!" Recalling Coros-whose fate Malygos had still not yet told to Talonixa- the icy-blue male shuddered. Kalec shared his unease and wished that Malygos would quickly tell everyone in the hopes that perhaps it would deter them from this mad attack. However, his host didn't speak, at the moment only concerned with the safety of his friends and not thinking of the potential repercussions of saying nothing. "Will not go," Alexstrasza said. "Will stay with my sister." "I stay also," Nozdormu briefly added. Neltharion momentarily looked frustrated, his natural tendency being to go wherever a fight could be promised. Still, he grudgingly nodded his agreement with the other two. Malygos added his voice to his friends', not that Talonixa seemed to care at that point. She started to turn from the five. Only then did Kalec's host finally recall what he should have told everyone at the first chance. "Wait! Must speak of Coros!" A suspicious Talonixa looked back. "Coros?" As best he could, Malygos quickly related to her and the rest the fate of the treacherous proto-dragon, leaving out only those details where his own struggle with the infection from the undead's bite were concerned. The far simpler language of his host frustrated Kalec, who knew that he could have explained much more clearly, but the essence of what Malygos sought to tell
was evidently understood by Talonixa and the others. But rather than be daunted by the savage tale, the imposing female simply sneered. "Coros fool . . . but gives us victory!" She peered at her loyal but confused followers. "Galakrond knows where we are, where we go! We fool him! We attack before! We attack in different place!" "Not good," Nozdormu muttered, his words going unheard by the increasingly confident Talonixa. "Must strike now!" She spun from Malygos again. "Come! We attack!" The gathered proto-dragons left the five behind. Neltharion fluttered back and forth, obviously desiring to be a part of the coming battle but in the end choosing his comrades over his desires. Still, he could not help expressing himself. "Why we not fight? Not like Talonixa, but we fight our way! We fight our own plan-" "And die as stupidly as they," Nozdormu, proving quite talkative this day, interrupted calmly. "There must be peace." Even Alexstrasza eyed her sister with something close to exasperation. "Ysera-" Without warning, the smaller female darted off. There was no doubt about her intentions. She still hoped to change the course of events, however mad that seemed to both Kalec and his host. Worse, Alexstrasza immediately chased after her sister, which caused the increasingly impatient Neltharion to do the same. Nozdormu looked to Malygos. "If this-" The scene suddenly shifted. Even though Kalec was better prepared for it, he still raged at being ripped from the moment before he knew how it would continue to play. There was a very real feeling running through him that despite the fact that all of this took place in the past, it had a relevance to his time that he dared not ignore. He-as much as Malygos-darted among the frosty peaks of the northern regions in great haste, searching with more and more desperation for someone whom at first Kalec could not identify from the proto-dragon's racing thoughts. The only thing that Kalec could tell was that something had caused a change in events. What it was finally flashed through Malygos's mind as he dived to investigate a shallow cave in one frosty area. Talonixa's great host had been unable to find the gargantuan Galakrond. How a creature as huge as the twisted proto-dragon could suddenly vanish
was a question that greatly plagued Kalec's host and also bothered Kalec. However, it was not the reason for Malygos's mad hunt in this obscure place far too near the misshapen leviathan's known haunts. Malygos was hunting Ysera. A shadow crossed Malygos. Neltharion dropped down. "Nothing!" the charcoal-gray male bellowed. "I smell her . . . but nothing!" Her scent pervaded the area but was not strong enough to be identified as very recent. Ysera might have passed this way as long ago as two days. Kalec understood now that it had been four days since the shift in the vision. Indeed, the last time anyone had seen Ysera was shortly after that scene had changed for Kalec. The weaker female had risen into the thick clouds, whereupon her trail had somehow faded. It had taken a frantic Alexstrasza another day and a half to locate a trail, but only after the four had already confronted an angry Talonixa leading a befuddled force in search of the absent Galakrond. "He is scared!" Talonixa had roared at the top of her voice for any to hear, perhaps even Galakrond himself. "He knows we hunt! He flees us!" This had hardly been the opinion of Malygos or his friends, but their voices had not been of interest to Talonixa. She had led her army off to the east, leaving the four to continue their own search. But why Ysera had abandoned the others when she had was still not apparent. Malygos had his suspicions, and from what Kalec divined, his host believed-not unreasonably-that Alexstrasza's sister had sought out Galakrond to plead again for a stop to the carnage. If so, there was a very good reason she had thus far remained unfound, a reason that none of the three males dared speak out loud in the presence of Alexstrasza. Ysera might already be a victim of Galakrond, foolishly placing herself in the mad behemoth's maw as easily as Coros had. "Saw nothing," Malygos informed Neltharion now, his pulse still pounding from his own swift search. Another proto-dragon soared above. Seeing that it was Nozdormu, both calmed. The third male appeared to have had no better luck than they. Of Alexstrasza, there was no sign, although Kalec understood that Malygos had a fair notion where she could be found. Once arriving at this place where Ysera's scent had grown stronger, they had divided up to cover certain areas where a proto-dragon could more easily be hidden from sight. But thus far, they had discovered nothing.
"She is not here," Neltharion suggested. "Was . . . but is not." His tone echoed Malygos's own concerns about Ysera's fate. Neither wanted to be the one to approach Alexstrasza with what seemed more and more the truth. "Maybe search more," the charcoal-gray male recommended with some hesitation. "Maybe flew too fast. I do that." They both knew that they had scoured their respective areas thoroughly, but being reluctant to face a dismayed Alexstrasza, they split up again. Malygos banked, then dropped lower. He did not expect to find anything, Kalec knew, but the only other choice was to report his failure to the fireorange female. The sharp eyes of the hunter surveyed the icy soil and frosty rock walls ahead. Malygos quickly recognized the few places where Ysera might have been able to secrete herself. However, he already knew that she could not have possibly slipped by him, and sure enough, the first three locations were as empty as he recalled them- Something moved near the mouth of the last cave. It was such a brief glimpse that neither Kalec nor his host could identify just what it was. The proto-dragon dived to investigate. He slowed when he neared the cave. There was the danger that whatever lurked within was not only not Ysera but a threat. Malygos squinted. The cave was utterly dark. That in itself unsettled the proto-dragon; his sharp eyes should have been able to penetrate the blackness for at least a few feet. Kalec's trepidation matched Malygos's as the protodragon first sniffed the air, then, scenting nothing, chose to enter. Visibility remained almost nonexistent as Malygos progressed. The icyblue male hesitated. Kalec's host sensed something amiss, but it was nothing that his mind could identify. However, Kalec, able to feel the ancient world, noted the hint of some great power nearby. "Welcome, clever hunter," came a deep voice with an otherworldly quality that made Kalec want to gasp and made Malygos instinctively retreat a step from that direction. A low silver light arose from the darkness. Within, a cloaked and hooded form already familiar to Kalec coalesced. Hissing, Malygos retreated again. Yet if the proto-dragon sought the way out, he was not to find it, nor was even Kalec able to note where it was. Only darkness prevailed except where the tiny figure stood.
Curiously, though, despite the fact that Malygos loomed over it, the mysterious figure unnerved the proto-dragon. It had little to do with what was to Malygos a very odd two-legged shape and more to do with the tremendous power Kalec had earlier felt. But while Kalec had come to grips with the fact that through his host, he confronted the form he had caught out of the corner of his eye in the Nexus, the dragon began to notice something else amiss with the being before them. Although by Kalec's estimation, the murky figure was barely taller than a night elf, the more Kalec studied it, the more the blue dragon could not help thinking that what he saw was not what actually stood there. He had the feeling of a being far more imposing than this, a being that instead of gazing up at the proto-dragon, should have been gazing down. "Who are you?" Malygos demanded. "Who?" "Follow the strengthening wind when you depart," the figure answered, at first making no sense to either Kalec or his host. "You will find your friend there." Another hiss escaped Malygos. "What thing are you?" "A friend . . . I hope." From the cloak emerged the strong hand of what Kalec judged to be a warrior. It pulled the hood back. For the proto-dragon, it was yet another revelation of just how strange the creature was. For Kalec, though, what stood revealed was enough to identify the figure for what he was, even though the dragon had never himself seen such beings in the flesh. A keeper . . . it can only be a keeper, Kalec thought with awe. The keepers were creatures of myth and legend to most other races. Even as the Aspect of Magic, Kalec had learned little of them beyond their work overseeing the refinement of Azeroth after the titans brought order to it and the fact that several of the keepers had built temples in the Storm Peaks. Evidence of their achievements could also be found in obscure places around the world, but the full effect of their great task remained a question. The skin was a brilliant silver. A thick, long mustache stretching down to the chest matched the golden hair framing the sturdy, broad-jawed face. Under a heavy brow, eyes the color of the sun and like those of night elves, outwardly seeming to lack pupils, studied the proto-dragon with not only interest but what appeared to be pride. What does he find of so much interest in Malygos? Kalec wondered. "You may call me Tyr," the keeper finally answered the proto-dragon's
original question. "And you are, of course, Malygos." Kalec's host understandably flinched. Baring his teeth, the proto-dragon growled, "How do you know my name?" "I have watched you. I have watched others. I see much potential in you, in these friends of yours . . . and I say that as someone who has watched many of your kind since the first of you began to stir toward self-consciousness." His answer only made Malygos shake his head in bewilderment and growing mistrust. Tyr was not a huge creature. Malygos believed that he could bite Tyr in half, but he also believed that attempting to do so would for unknown reasons be something that the proto-dragon would regret. He turned away, once more seeking the missing entrance. This time, it revealed itself. However, Malygos made no move toward it, as aware as Kalec that it had reappeared too conveniently. Malygos, of course, did not yet understand magic as Kalec did, but he was clever enough to link the odd happenings with the being who already knew his name without asking. Malygos peered over his shoulder at Tyr. "If it is your wish to leave, I will not stop you," Tyr said. With a reptilian grin, Malygos chose to take him at his word. He darted through the gap, clearly expecting to be prevented at the last second. Instead, the open air greeted the icy-blue male. The moment he was fully outside, Malygos swung around to face the cave. Kalec understood that he expected to find Tyr following, but of the keeper, there was no sign. "You see? I did not lie." Snarling, Malygos gazed up at the top of a low ridge. There, an innocentlooking Tyr stood patiently waiting. The proto-dragon rose into the air until he hovered over the cloaked figure. Tyr calmly spread both hands wide, a sign of peace. Despite that display, Malygos did not relax, and even Kalec wondered what exactly such a formidable being wanted with a proto-dragon. "Not funny!" Malygos snapped, rearing his head. He prepared to exhale, something that Kalec thought would only lead to disaster. But at the last moment, the proto-dragon changed his mind. Instead, Malygos veered from the tiny figure and headed on. He did not get far before discovering Tyr standing atop another ridge ahead of him. While this hardly surprised Kalec, the young Malygos proved a hardheaded sort. He immediately turned in another direction and flew as hard
as he could from the spot where Tyr stood. The cloaked figure reappeared a short distance ahead. This time, Malygos did not hesitate to exhale. Kalec sensed that his host wished not to slay Tyr, only to keep him from following. The stream of frost shot toward Tyr, then split, spraying the rocky surroundings but not touching him in the least. "Please," Tyr quietly began again. "I wish only to talk with you . . . about Galakrond." Malygos's mind struggled between attacking, fleeing, and hearing the strange creature out. To Kalec's relief, his host chose the last. "What do you want? Where is Ysera?" "You will find her . . . and you will find other things, but those I cannot change." Tyr did not elaborate, instead returning to his original subject. "But for the moment, we must speak quickly and about Galakrond." The continued mention of the sinister behemoth made the proto-dragon anxiously glance around, but of course, there was no sign of the gargantuan fiend. Malygos peered expectantly at Tyr. "We never intended this path," Tyr continued, his own gaze turning inward. A shadow crossed his features. "Galakrond should never have journeyed in the direction he did, and we did not prevent it. Now . . . now this young world faces annihilation." While Malygos did not understand all of the complex words, he understood enough to catch that there was some tie between Galakrond and this thing. Kalec understood even more than Malygos, but in the end, his thoughts finished the same. This being-this keeper-knew why Galakrond had become the monster, and felt some fault at that happening. Before Malygos could press the questions that Kalec and he shared, Tyr cut him off. "I have been observing so many of you, seeking an answer. I thought for a while . . . but Coros proved as focused in his obsession as Galakrond but with more foolhardiness than even Galakrond contained, it seems." "Coros? You watch him? Why?" For the first time, a hint of frustration passed across Tyr's sturdy face. Kalec, though, saw that it was frustration not with Malygos but with Tyr himself. "A good question with no good answer. I leave it at that. What matters is that you might be the key to salvaging this situation . . . if we can turn this
mad charge from disaster to victory." The proto-dragon continued to hover, but Kalec felt his patience quickly fraying. Proto-dragons did not have the patience of dragons, although even Kalec knew his could be very short at times. Malygos was coming close to trying to flee again. Tyr obviously saw that also. He smiled briefly as if to reassure the protodragon. "In our seeking to guide Azeroth's growth as a whole, we have been too long removed from the daily aspects of the world, too long from interacting with the life of that world. Without guidance, events somehow brought us Galakrond. With guidance, we and your kind might be able to set Kalimdor back on its destined path." "We fight Galakrond?" Malygos's tone made clear his questioning of the sanity of Tyr's suggestion. "Talonixa fights Galakrond! I-we-do not fight!" He shook his head. "Foolish creature you are!" This time, Malygos did attempt another escape. He flew around Tyr, going such a great distance to the side of the cloaked figure that Kalec could not help but wonder if the proto-dragon also sensed that while Tyr appeared tiny, he was in actuality something far larger, far greater. Kalec and his host both expected Tyr to materialize before them, but there was no sign. While Malygos took heart from this, Kalec could not fathom why Tyr would simply let the proto-dragon go. Suddenly, what appeared to be a wall stood before the racing Malygos. He managed to bank at the last moment, and as he did, something unsettling about the wall registered with both the proto-dragon and Kalec. It was not a wall but the torso of some gigantic two-legged form. But as Malygos spun back, he found no giant . . . only Tyr. Still, even the young proto-dragon understood that he had caught a glimpse of what Tyr truly was. That glimpse was powerful enough to make him eye the tiny creature once more standing before him with something near awe. But Tyr's expression extinguished Malygos's obvious hope that what the proto-dragon had momentarily seen could mean Galakrond's defeat. "We are not tied to this world as your kind is. The others . . . the others of my kind cannot be urged anymore to face this danger. We have grown too weary from our past battles. We-I-need your kind, Malygos. I need you." Still hovering, the proto-dragon finally nodded. "What we do?" Tyr looked vastly relieved. "First, we must gather your friends. Together, I think they could be the answer. Nowhere else have I seen this immediate and
intricate bonding among those of different proto-dragon families. Perhaps it might ironically even have something to do with Galakrond's coming. I do not know. Whatever the reason, this bonding may be the key to the only chance of victory still left to us." Some of the words were, again, more than Malygos could comprehend. However, he could easily detect Tyr's uncertainty that even Malygos and his kind would be enough to prevent Galakrond from ravaging Azeroth. "Gather the others, Malygos. They trust you. Lead them here. I will be waiting-" A warning roar echoed from the east, a roar so thundering it could only belong to Galakrond. Tyr turned at the cry. Malygos's gaze swept past him to look in the same direction, and in that moment, the cloak swung aside, revealing something that only Kalec noticed and only Kalec would have recognized. Attached by netting to a thick silver belt was nothing less than the artifact itself. Even as Kalec saw this, the scene turned on its head, and its elements shattered, scattering in all directions. The blackness held sway for but a second before the elements regathered and formed a new scene. Proto-dragons filled the sky. By the scores, they roared their challenge at the horizon before them. As Kalec sought to identify what was happening, Malygos joined the others in seemingly challenging the empty air. And the sky answered. Galakrond, still so distant that he could not be seen, answered. Kalec silently swore. Somehow he-or, rather, Malygos-had become part of Talonixa's grand and likely doomed charge after all.
FIVE THE DEAD AND THE UNDEAD
 
Jaina woke with a start, her head snapping up from the pages of the musty book she was reading when exhaustion had claimed her. The archmage eyed the faint moisture on one page and gestured with some slight irritation. The page dried, none the worse for the wear. Another waste of time! She pointed her finger at the wall of books and parchments. The book fluttered to the spot from which she had summoned it. Thoughts other than her own abruptly filled her head, messages sent by various magi seeking her advice or reminding her of tasks she should have been working on instead of this increasingly futile quest. Jaina knew that her position demanded that she deal with these other matters, but she rose from her chair and once more approached the trove of magical knowledge. Before she could make a decision, another voice overwhelmed the rest. Jaina . . . come quickly. . . . "Kalec?" The contact broke, but not before she sensed from where he was calling. The location surprised her, but the archmage did not hesitate. She exhaled and cast. Her arrival did not go as expected. She appeared not only many yards from where she had intended but also more than a foot above the ground. The archmage landed hard on her heels, the collision vibrating through her bones. Biting back an epithet worthy of her naval father, Jaina focused. Regaining her equilibrium, she surveyed the dark land before her, wondering why Kalec would call her to, of all places, the Dragonblight. Moreover, the archmage wondered why he would summon her not from the temple but from the shadows of the incredibly vast skeleton ahead. Jaina knew of the huge bones that had once been a behemoth called Galakrond, but there her knowledge faded into what myths and legends the Aspects had passed along over the millennia. When they did speak of Galakrond, dragons made vague comments honoring him as the Father of Dragons. It was supposedly why so many of those dragons who came to die in the Dragonblight chose to set their bodies, if not facing Galakrond, then certainly in the vicinity of his skeleton.
Jaina concentrated on Kalec, silently calling his name and awaiting a link with his mind. When that did not happen, she sharpened her call by directing it toward the monstrous rib cage. But although there came no answer, Jaina could not help feeling that the skeleton was where she needed to go. A fear abruptly arose in her that Kalec might now lie injured and unconscious-or even worse-somewhere within the half-buried bones. A haze draped over the region, making it impossible for the archmage to see anything inside the ribs. She probed with her power but found nothing- No. For just a moment, Jaina thought she sensed Kalec. Without hesitation, she transported herself nearer. This time, the archmage appeared where she desired. The ribs loomed over her. But of Kalec, there was still no sign. Jaina finally called his name. The only answer was the growing wind blowing through the bones. Aware that her destination had been this desolate place, using magic, she had shielded herself from the expected cold, and so the chill that ran down her spine had nothing to do with the elements. Despite that, though, the archmage did not hesitate to enter. The moment she did, she sensed something else. A faint magical trace that reminded her of the artifact's aura. The source of the trace proved to be a hole dug deep into the frozen ground, a hole that also radiated hints of Kalec's unique magical signature. This is where he found it, Jaina realized. He went to a lot of trouble to dig it out. Why? She looked over her shoulder, suddenly certain that she was not alone. Even though the archmage saw nothing, she could not shake the feeling. Still, she returned to her inspection of the hole. Searching beyond Kalec's trace, Jaina studied the residue of ancient magic continuing to permeate the area. It grew stronger the more she delved into the hole itself. The archmage marveled at the efforts Kalec had used to free the artifact. And again came the question of why. . . . The shadows around her deepened. Jaina created a small golden sphere and sent it into the hole the better to see . . . anything. An exasperated sigh escaped her. She glanced around again, seeking either Kalec or some other figure. Jaina now knew that she was being led, but whether this was all a trap or something far different, the spellcaster could not
say. Thus far, she detected no threat, but she also detected no reason for her being there. Her sphere changed color without warning, turning from gold to a deep blue, and in that blue light, Jaina Proudmoore saw something not evident before. It was not a physical object but a force somehow tied to the relic that had been buried there. It was also something that she had seen once before and that she knew was recorded in the very tomes through which she had been burrowing before thinking she heard Kalec's summons. The artifact itself at last began to make some sense to the archmage, but this only fueled her concern. If what she sensed about the magics involved in its creation was true-if what this radiant force meant to her study of the artifact was true-then there was something terrible going on that- Again, Jaina felt as if someone watched her. This time, she quickly cast a spell behind her, and for her efforts, she was rewarded with a slight grunt. Spinning around, she discovered a female taunka standing only a few feet from her. "Who are you?" the archmage demanded. "Buniq . . . my name is Buniq," the taunka rasped. Jaina's spell held the creature in place. The taunka was armed with a spear, but Jaina saw that the weapon was held casually and had not been readied for throwing. "What are you doing here?" "Hunting. Saw the light. Thought it was another hunter." The archmage could detect nothing amiss and finally released the taunka. Buniq exhaled and stretched her arms, although she was also careful to keep her grip on the spear loose at all times. "You're free to go," Jaina remarked, her tone indicating that she would prefer Buniq did as she suggested. The taunka started to turn, then glanced past the spellcaster at the hole. "He searched there, too. The blue one." The blue one? Kalec? Jaina's mind raced. Before the archmage could ask, the hunter abruptly added, "He found something. I think." While the information was of some relevance to Jaina, it did not resolve anything for her. She nodded her thanks, her interest in the taunka fading. "Saw something else . . . after he left." Jaina stared at her. "What else did you see? What?"
Buniq hesitated. "Saw another. All covered." "All covered? A cloak?" After Buniq bent her head forward in what was evidently a nod, the archmage, now very much interested again, asked, "You could make out nothing else about this figure?" "Tall. Taller than you. It looked into hole, just like you." There had been no magical trace from some other spellcaster, at least not that Jaina had detected. With her skill, it was unlikely that she would have failed to notice that another mage had been there . . . unless . . . She needed to know more. "Did this figure do anything?" "Yes." Buniq thought for a moment, then carefully passed the spear from one thick hand to the other. She raised her now-freed hand and began to draw something in the air. Once finished, the taunka stilled again. Jaina tried to make sense of whatever Buniq had done but could not completely recall it. "Draw it again, but slower." As Buniq began, the archmage cast a simple but useful spell. Immediately, the air flared silver where the taunka had started drawing. The hunter hesitated. "Go on, please, Buniq." Exhaling, the taunka obeyed. The silver fire followed as she completed the symbol. Jaina watched with ever-increasing interest, all the while hoping that Buniq had a very sharp memory. The taunka stepped back. Jaina summoned the glowing pattern to her, examined it for a second, and then, with a grimace, turned it around so that she saw it as Buniq had. A crescent star overlooking a stylized bird greeted her, both bound in the center by three simple but significant runes of triangular shape. The archmage gasped. She had seen this symbol before, and she recalled just where. Returning her attention to Buniq, Jaina asked, "Was there anything else-" The taunka was gone. Jaina squinted and saw a few tracks leading off beyond the rib cage. She should have expected that a hunter would be skilled in moving stealthily, but not only had Buniq evaded the archmage's enhanced senses, but she had done so with astonishing swiftness. Moreover, Jaina had no idea why Buniq had left without warning, although perhaps the simple fact that Jaina was a spellcaster was answer enough. She dismissed the taunka from her thoughts. Jaina needed to return to the books immediately. It was possible that this clue would be nothing more than
a dead end, but from what the archmage already recalled of the pages she intended to hunt down again, she doubted that would be the case. Her hopes rising, Jaina silently thanked the absent Buniq for having still been in the region hunting, then cast a spell to return herself to her sanctum. But had the archmage chosen to glance one more time at where the taunka had stood, she might have this time noticed that there were no hoofprints anywhere. •   •   • Kalec did not recall so many proto-dragons collected at the previous gatherings. Their numbers were staggering. Through Malygos, he saw more family patterns than he had known existed among the proto-dragons. Even Malygos appeared somewhat awed by the legions around him, although it quickly became clear that he was there not because he wanted to be but because Tyr had asked him to be. The others were also present but scattered among the many. Even Ysera was there, having been located by Alexstrasza in a narrow ravine riddled with small caves. Malygos's thoughts constantly went to Ysera, who appeared to be a tremendous question mark in whatever Tyr had planned with the five. Malygos's concern over Ysera overwhelmed Kalec's ability to understand what the plan involved. From what Kalec could sense about Ysera, the others believed that she hid some secret from them, something she would not even speak of to Alexstrasza. Ysera had too readily agreed to come with them, as if eager to be away from the area in which they had found her. All of that left Malygos wondering if the pale yellow female would suddenly abandon the attack at just the critical moment for whatever she kept from them. Fragmented memories concerning Tyr revealed a surprise to Kalec: his host was still the only one who knew of the cloaked figure. Tyr wanted to work through Malygos, believing that it would be best if the others thought that it was the icy-blue male who had come up with the plan. Kalec gathered that the reason for the secrecy had to do with something Tyr had not revealed even to Malygos, perhaps some portion of the plan that Kalec's host might have rejected. And not at all to his surprise, Malygos suspected something similar. Talonixa roared again, her cry the signal for a new chorus of challenges focused on the yet-unseen Galakrond. In truth, the collective roar seemed as impressive to Kalec as that of the distant behemoth, and he began to wonder
if perhaps Talonixa had chosen the right course of action after all. Out of the corner of his eye, Malygos watched Ysera suddenly drop below the rest. He immediately dived after her. She looked up as he neared, her eyes narrowed. Malygos's suspicions of trouble heightened. "Stay with us!" he called. "We must lead the others high!" "Only resting! Tired!" It was true that Ysera did not have the stamina of the others and that there had been little time for her to rest since Malygos had gathered his companions and told them of his plan, but the male remained distrustful. Fortunately for him, Alexstrasza chose that moment to join them. "You are well?" she anxiously asked her sister. "Just . . . tired . . ." Ysera seemed no happier to see Alexstrasza than she had been to see Malygos. "I will stay with you until we need to rise higher." Alexstrasza gave Malygos a glance of dismissal. The male quickly veered away from the sisters. The fire-orange female would keep a proper eye on Ysera. The plan Tyr had suggested could still- A roar a hundred times more resounding shook both the land and the air. The great formation created by Talonixa briefly lost order. She snarled furiously at her followers, bringing them back in line. Yet still there was no sign of Galakrond. Talonixa laughed. "You see? He fears us!" It was the moment that Malygos had been waiting for, and thus, it was also the moment when his thoughts on the plan grew clearer for Kalec. Height. The plan involved height. Tyr knew something about Galakrond that the proto-dragons did not. The higher up, the thinner the air. That much even Malygos knew. However, the limit to how high Galakrond could fly for more than a few minutes was lower than that of the smaller fliers. The key to victory lay in drawing the monster up where he would grow more sluggish, be forced to gasp for the air needed to fill his massive lungs. At that point- and perhaps only at that point-Galakrond would be vulnerable. The icy-blue male came up beside Talonixa. "Must fly high! Very high! Galakrond cannot fly high long! Cannot breathe well there!" The imposing female snorted. "Away!" "Fly high!" Malygos insisted. "Galakrond cannot breathe well there! Will tire! Will fail!"
This time, Talonixa appeared to consider his suggestion. Tyr and Malygos had counted on her cunning to enable this plan to work. Malygos exhaled in relief. It was a mistake. Talonixa's expression hardened. Both Kalec and his host realized that she took Malygos's reaction for satisfaction at her having to bow to his wisdom. She snapped at Malygos. Simultaneously, two of her lieutenants dived in to aid her. As if out of nowhere, Neltharion and Nozdormu joined Malygos. Neltharion let out a challenging roar, which was answered by both of Talonixa's followers. Behind the six, the rest of the proto-dragons faltered, uncertain whether their charge had now turned into a war among their own members. "Retreat!" Nozdormu hissed to Malygos. "Retreat!" Neltharion also heard the other male's warning. "No! Fight her! Become alpha! Command all!" Unlike Nozdormu, Neltharion had not bothered to be quiet. His words sent Talonixa into a rage. She unleashed a bolt not at Neltharion but at the trio's apparent leader, Malygos. Kalec's host twisted but still received a painful scorch on one wing. As he did, more of Talonixa's most loyal followers joined. "Retreat!" Nozdormu urged once more. Malygos did not dive, as might have been expected, but rather pushed higher. His comrades followed without question, and behind them several of Talonixa's acolytes pursued. But the pursuers stopped short at an abrupt snarl from the female. As Malygos continued rising higher, he glanced down to see the formation tightening again. He had hoped that Talonixa and her lieutenants would give chase, possibly leading the rest of the proto-dragons upward after all. Momentum pushed Malygos into the clouds. Flying became more of a strain as the air thinned. He paused, waiting for the other two to catch up. "Knew this would fail!" Neltharion rumbled. "Told you!" Malygos did not answer. Kalec sensed that there had been more complexity to Tyr's plan and that Malygos silently berated himself for misplaying the situation. Based on what he could read of his host's thoughts, Kalec could find no fault in the proto-dragon's actions, but the blue dragon knew that there were things still hidden from him.
"What now?" Nozdormu asked. "Follow from above!" Malygos told them. "Alexstrasza! Ysera! They join soon!" In truth, Malygos had some doubts about Ysera's resolve, but he was certain that Alexstrasza would bring her sister along. Kalec saw that his host also had a secondary plan in mind, still based on Tyr's original notions. Already aware that Talonixa might not listen to reason, Malygos had suggested that the five of them could yet lure Galakrond up by attacking him from above. It was a more desperate hope but still a hope. Glancing down, Nozdormu muttered, "They move on." As he warned, the proto-dragons below were already far ahead. Malygos saw no sign of the sisters but could not delay. He would have to trust in Alexstrasza. "Come!" Not bothering to wait, the icy-blue male flew through the clouds after Talonixa's legions. In order to keep her followers together and not too exhausted to fight Galakrond, the female had to set a pace that some of the slower fighters could keep. Malygos soon not only caught up to those below but also began to pass them. The clouds thickened ahead. Malygos did not fear finding Galakrond among them; the gargantuan fiend could have never hidden his bulk in the clouds, no matter how dense they became. Unfortunately, as he pressed, Kalec's host began to flag for the very reason that he had tried to convince Talonixa to lead the others up. The thin air had his breathing becoming more and more ragged. He had not intended to fly this much above the ground until almost upon Galakrond, but now he wanted to avoid being seen by Talonixa or her followers. Neltharion caught up to him. He, too, looked to be struggling for air. "Must -fly-lower-" Something collided with Neltharion. The proto-dragon went flying backward, the momentum of the thing that had flown into him sending the charcoal-gray male hurtling uncontrollably. Malygos immediately turned about, hoping that it was not too late to help his friend. Only then did he see that what had struck Neltharion was one of the notliving. Indeed, its stench spread even through the thin air as it and the living proto-dragon tumbled together. Curiously, Malygos noticed that the undead seemed to have collided with
Neltharion at an angle that made any attack of consequence initially impossible. It dawned on both Kalec and his host that the animated corpse had not actually attacked Neltharion but, rather, had simply run into him by accident in the dense clouds. In fact, the undead almost seemed more interested in flying on than in fighting. Neltharion evidently noticed this, too, for he pushed himself away from the monster and let it move on. The undead slowly began circling back the way it had come . . . or it would have, if Neltharion had not taken advantage of its ignorance of him by ripping its neck out from behind, then tearing both wings with his powerful hind claws. The charcoal-gray proto-dragon watched with amusement as the sundered parts dropped, and Malygos and Nozdormu rejoined him. "Stupid creature!" Neltharion mocked. "Brain all rot! Not even see or fight now!" "Strange," Nozdormu murmured. Malygos-and Kalec-very much agreed with Nozdormu's succinct assessment. Malygos's gaze followed the estimated path the undead would have taken had Neltharion not destroyed it. An uneasy feeling filled Kalec's host. "Follow!" he hissed. Quickly but carefully, Malygos pushed higher despite the increasing desire to drop to thicker air. So pressed was the proto-dragon that Kalec could not at first fathom what so bothered him. And then, as they reached a slight break within the cloud cover, what Malygos had feared became evident to his unseen companion. The sky was filled with undead. They circled constantly, as if that was the only desire left in their putrefying brains. Over and over, they circled, some in great arcs, some in tight ones. One flew much too near Malygos but did not take any notice of him. Neltharion and Nozdormu caught up with him, and even the charcoal-gray male appeared stunned. "So many, almost as many as us!" There had been a few sightings of the undead, but in the growing anticipation of battling Galakrond, the living proto-dragons had not paid that much mind, not even Malygos. Now that lapse was coming back to haunt them. "Why here? Why do they just fly circles?" Nozdormu asked. Kalec knew, and so did Malygos. "They wait . . . for us. For all of us."
"They wait?" Neltharion shook his head. "They not smart! No thinking!" Malygos nodded. The undead proto-dragons had no true minds, but something they were bound to did. "No. Galakrond smart. Galakrond thinks . . . he thinks very well." It was a frustratingly uncomplicated way of phrasing it, but Kalec saw that somehow the other two understood what Malygos tried to convey. As for the dragon, he shared both his host's astonishment and his growing fear. The undead were circling because they were indeed waiting for the living to pass underneath them. They had not planned it themselves-Galakrond had. Through the same foulness that mutated him, the monstrous proto-dragon also now appeared to control his victims, and he was using them to set a trap of his own that would engulf everyone. "Must warn all!" Malygos shouted as best as the air permitted. "Must-" As one, the undead ceased their circling . . . and dived. Malygos and Kalec could only watch in horror. The discovery had come too late. The trap had been sprung.



ONE INTO THE NEXUS
Sweat dripped over Jaina's face as she continued to focus on her spell. The Nexus pulsated, the outer wards now visible even to a non-spellcaster, not that there were any nearby. The archmage felt the resistance to her work pushing back, but she countered it as best she could. And then . . . all opposition to Jaina's efforts evaporated. The wards returned to their original states. The Nexus ceased glowing. Without hesitation, Jaina transported herself inside. To her surprise, the chamber in which she materialized looked untouched by all her efforts outside. Pushing that fact aside, the archmage used her powers to seek out any unseen threat still lurking throughout the sanctum. Finding none, she sent herself to where she last recalled Kalec being. He was not in sight. Panic arose, but as she peered over her shoulder, Jaina found Kalec's prone form lying on the other side of the chamber. From what she could determine, he looked as if he had crawled there. Even as she thought that, Kalec's left arm moved. His fingers scratched at the floor, and to her further dismay, Jaina saw that those fingers ended in the claws of a dragon. In fact, as she neared him, the spellcaster saw other distorted features. Stepping next to Kalec, Jaina almost slipped. The floor around him was slippery with his sweat. In addition to his altered state, he also appeared more emaciated. With growing fury, she turned her attention to the relic. It sat slowly pulsating, hardly radiating any noticeable magical emanations, and to her practiced eye seemed perfectly harmless. Her personal protective spells strengthened, Jaina surveyed the object. While on one hand the archmage could appreciate the elements of its creation, on the other she despised it for what it was doing to her Kalec. With that last sentiment firmly entrenched in her heart and mind, Jaina formed the reversed symbol and sent it flying toward the artifact.
But as the icon touched it, the relic shimmered. Its energy reached through the link Jaina had to maintain with the symbol and caught the archmage square before she could dismiss the spell. Jaina's world turned upside down. That was followed by utter darkness and then a babble of voices with a particularly reptilian hint to them. And that was followed by a mad array of images, including creatures she recognized as protodragons. In the midst of those, Jaina realized that she was a proto-dragon herself -and one whom she knew, albeit in a far altered form. Alexstrasza? I'm part of Alexstrasza? It was a very young Alexstrasza, an Alexstrasza whom Jaina had never really known existed. Through Alexstrasza's eyes, she saw other proto-dragons whom she vaguely recognized but would not have specifically known if not for her host. She saw Ysera (a shockingly small Ysera), Nozdormu, Neltharion -Neltharion!-and Malygos. Each of the scenes lasted barely a breath, and many appeared to Jaina to be out of sequence. Most made no sense, and more than a few filled her with dread. The archmage saw horrific, rotting proto-dragons that were surely undead. She saw the wasted corpses of others. Most daunting to Jaina was the monstrous reality that was Galakrond, and she felt Alexstrasza's chilling dismay as if it were her own. It was all too much. Jaina almost passed out under the strain. At the last moment, she imagined the reversed symbol and tried to impose it on every image that confronted her. With a gasp, the archmage discovered herself stumbling back from the artifact. If not for her protective spells, Jaina would have fallen and likely cracked open her skull. As it was, she had to plant herself quickly against the nearest wall and stand there for more than a minute as she fought the residues of vertigo. The voices still echoing in her head, Jaina looked from the relic to Kalec. She had some notion of what he was going through, but suspected that her experience had been only a fraction of what the blue dragon was caught up in. The moment that Jaina felt able to, she returned to Kalec. With gentle hands, she turned his face to her. Up close, his condition was worse than she imagined. He reminded her of how it had been said some of the more severe victims of
the Emerald Nightmare had appeared, when thousands had fallen to the power of the Nightmare Lord and his master. They had lain helpless, unable to wake from their tormented sleep even as their minds began to waste away. Jaina shuddered. She had been one of those victims-one of the earliest, in fact-but until now, the extent of her condition had not truly registered with her. That, in turn, only magnified her current fear for Kalec. He mumbled. Jaina leaned close. His eyes opened wide-eyes that were pure dragon, not those he had when wearing this form. The archmage pulled back in surprise. A frosty exhalation enshrouded her. Had she not protected herself, it was very likely she would have died. Even despite her spells, the archmage could feel the intense cold. Yet this was not the breath weapon that she knew Kalec used. Rather, from the fragmented vision that she had experienced, Jaina realized that Kalec had acted as young Malygos had. Kalec settled down again. Jaina cautiously touched his cheek, then his throat. What he was currently experiencing in the vision, she did not know, but his blood raced. Casting a spell, the archmage searched for the link between the artifact and Kalec, only to find no trace. She had been certain that she could locate some connection and take steps to sever it. That forced her focus back to the artifact. Moving more warily, Jaina inspected every visible side. She neither saw nor detected anything new. However, as she started to pay attention to the aura surrounding it, the archmage noticed something about the pulsations. Jaina quickly returned to Kalec and felt his pulse. This time, though, the spellcaster simultaneously turned her gaze to the relic. The pulsations matched the throbbing in Kalec's throat. The artifact had become attuned to his life . . . or perhaps had attuned him to its spellwork. In either case, Jaina Proudmoore had a plan. With it, she believed that she could finally free Kalec from the artifact's overwhelming influence. There remained but one flaw with her plan, a flaw that made Jaina hesitate to commit to it even as Kalec began mumbling again. Yes, she could very well
free him, but it was just as likely that her attempt would also end in his painful death. Kalec renewed clawing the floor. His claws tore valleys in the hard surface. Gritting her teeth, the archmage saw that she had no choice. She immediately began casting. Casting and praying . . . •   •   • Malygos tore his gaze from the ever-swelling Galakrond and concentrated on Tyr. As Tyr lay there, the proto-dragons' ally had at some point shrunken down to nearly the size he'd been when Malygos had first seen him. A desperate notion ran through Malygos's mind, a notion that seemed desperate even to Kalec. Yet the dragon agreed with his host that there was no other recourse. As he had done with his own wounded leg, Malygos exhaled on Tyr's ruined limb. The stump froze. The blood ceased flowing. Tyr let out a moan but otherwise seemed to calm. "Must take him away," Ysera declared as she joined him. "Where?" The shadowed region in which the survivors hid appeared to be the most logical conclusion, but if Galakrond followed the scent of Tyr's blood, then Malygos might end up betraying the ragged refugees. He could not bring himself to do that, and from what he had seen of Tyr, he doubted the twolegged being would have wanted such a sacrifice on his behalf. "Must take him away," the yellowish female repeated. Shrugging, she added, "We find somewhere! Just far from Galakrond." Kalec's host glanced up at their monstrous foe. At the moment, Galakrond appeared lost in his latest transformation, but whether that stupor would last a few more seconds or keep on for longer was impossible to say. The fact that Galakrond continued to hover as this happened made Malygos believe that they did not have much time at all. Without waiting for Ysera to help him, Malygos seized hold of Tyr by his shoulders and took to the sky. Instinct drove him toward the most desolate region he could think of beyond the place where they were already. He only hoped it would be desolate enough and that Galakrond's condition would give them the time they needed.
Looking over his shoulder, Malygos saw a proto-dragon coming up behind him. Instead of Ysera, it proved to be Alexstrasza. With her hind paws, she seized Tyr's legs. The weight better distributed, the icy-blue male and Alexstrasza were able to pick up the pace. They matched wing beats as they flew, the coordination further adding to their speed. Daring to glance back again, Malygos became both more relieved and apprehensive. Relieved because not only did Ysera follow, but also, at a greater distance, followed Neltharion and Nozdormu. Apprehensive because Galakrond had grown yet again and changed form somewhat. His body was now bulkier, and jagged spikes dotted the upper part of his torso. And although he continued to hover, he looked finally to be stirring. Alexstrasza, too, had been peering back at Galakrond. "Fly faster," she suddenly suggested to Malygos. "Lower. Galakrond will not see us so soon." The icy-blue male nodded- And the vision shifted. The cold, stark landscape startled Kalec, for at first, he thought he was back in his own era. The high peaks, the desolate, flat plains beyond-he knew this place. They were in what would someday be the Dragonblight. Malygos and Alexstrasza still held on to Tyr, but now they descended. A choice had been made, but why it was this particular location was not clear in Malygos's thoughts. Kalec assumed that they had simply chosen somewhere they hoped would not be readily discovered by Galakrond. With extreme care, the pair set Tyr on the chilly ground, then alighted next to him. Malygos peered around as if expecting something, but even Kalec's host did not seem to know just what he sought. Alexstrasza looked to Malygos, as did the rest once they landed. "Here?" Neltharion finally growled. "No good hunting. Grazers far from here. Some good hiding in mountains, but too open here." "Here," the icy-blue male replied with a certainty that did not match the knowledge Kalec could glean from his host's mind. Malygos simply knew that he had to come to this place. Nozdormu looked satisfied with the vague answer but then asked, "What now?"
Malygos looked south, deeper into the flat, stark plains that made up much of the Dragonblight. "That way." He started off, only to have Ysera block his path. With a puzzled expression, she gestured with her snout behind Malygos. "What about Tyr?" Kalec's host glanced back. Both he and the blue dragon had somehow forgotten the keeper's presence. While Malygos took this in stride, Kalec wondered at the proto-dragon's memory lapse. It was too sudden. Fluttering off the ground, Malygos took gentle hold of Tyr again. As far as Kalec could tell, Tyr looked no worse than before, but whether that was good or bad was impossible for the blue dragon to say. He knew only that the protodragons had to do more for Tyr very soon. But what? Kalec wondered. Had it been he to decide, he would have figured out a magic spell to preserve Tyr until some method of healing could be found, but the proto-dragons did not have any ability to do even that. Magic. . . . Now Kalec felt as if he had forgotten something else that was vital, something having to do with his own existence. Something to do with . . . the Nexus? Malygos chose that moment to descend again. Focusing on the landscape below, Kalec at first did not see anything other than more icy ground. Then a slightly darker spot caught his attention. As Malygos drew nearer, Kalec realized that the dark spot was a frozen lake. The blue dragon could not remember such a spot in his time, but he knew that his memory was faultier than he had originally thought. Landing on the edge of the lake, Malygos again set Tyr down, this time placing the keeper on his back. That allowed Kalec to study the prone form. Tyr's breathing looked shallow but regular, and the stump was still protected by the frost Malygos had previously sprayed over it. The proto-dragon carefully exhaled on the savage wound again, reinforcing his earlier efforts. Yet, doubts about Tyr's survival once more began to creep into the mind of Kalec's host, doubts the blue dragon shared. Despite that, Malygos abruptly abandoned Tyr for the frozen lake. Neltharion and the others joined him, the four looking oddly breathless as they landed.
"So fast!" Neltharion finally managed after taking a couple of big gulps of air. "Malygos flew so fast!" "Should have waited for us," Alexstrasza reprimanded him. "Saw a not-living far that way." She indicated the west. "Maybe others near. . . . If they see us, Galakrond sees us. . . ." Malygos saw nothing in that direction, and to Kalec he seemed not inclined to be concerned despite Alexstrasza's sensible words. Again, it was not Malygos as Kalec had come to know him. The icy-blue male continued to the frozen lake. As he peered down into it, he and Kalec saw some slight movement in the water. That his host was hungry Kalec could understand, but Malygos bordered on the obsessive. In fact, Kalec's host was persistent in pushing the other four to join him. "Come! Must eat! Strength needed!" Neltharion obeyed without question, his appetite always the greatest of the five. Nozdormu looked dubious, then nodded. Ysera quietly followed the three. Only Alexstrasza did not move. "What of Tyr?" "He sleeps," the icy-blue male responded. "Let him." The answer was not said with coldness but with practicality. Alexstrasza considered the suggestion, then finally nodded and joined the four. Kalec would have preferred that someone watched Tyr, but now all five of the proto-dragons were eager to feed. The ice supported not only Malygos's weight but also that of the rest of the group. Nozdormu scratched at the ice but, despite his sharp claws, made little headway. Neltharion looked ready to stomp on the frozen surface-which would have no doubt shattered all the ice, including where the five stood-but Alexstrasza quickly hissed and shook her head. With the others watching, she chose a spot a little farther into the lake, then carefully exhaled. The concentrated flame melted a hole into the thick ice until water bubbled up to the top. She expanded the hole until it was a satisfactory width. Although Alexstrasza had created the hole, she let Neltharion feed first. He eagerly leaned over it, then suddenly thrust his head down. The charcoal-gray male withdrew, a thick fish in his mouth. Grunting with satisfaction, he stepped back.
Alexstrasza went next, her task taking slightly longer before she caught sight of her prey. Malygos finally took his turn. He had barely leaned over when another fat fish swam into range. Catching it was as simple a task for Kalec's host as it had been for the others. As the icy-blue male backed away, Ysera moved toward the hole. Malygos turned to the shore, his catch still wriggling in his jaws. Once off the ice, the proto-dragon surveyed the chilly landscape. There was no sign of either Galakrond or any of the undead. Malygos focused his attention on the fish, tearing into it with such gusto that Kalec wished his host would shut his eyes so that the blue dragon would not have to watch. Trying to concentrate on anything else, Kalec shifted his thoughts to Tyr. That the proto-dragons had left the keeper in order to eat was not entirely a surprise, but they needed to find other aid for Tyr as soon as possible. Kalec wondered where the other keepers were. Did they not sense Tyr's urgent situation? The blue dragon had thought that they would have some kind of link with one another, something that would- A ragged hiss arose from Malygos's right. Both Kalec and his host recognized the foul sound. How the two emaciated proto-dragons had snuck up on the party, neither Malygos nor Kalec knew. There was no time to consider that, either, for one of the undead lunged for Malygos, its yellowed teeth dripping with a sickening green fluid that surely boded ill if it even touched the living proto-dragon. Spinning to the side, Malygos brought his tail around. Like a whip, it caught the undead's hind leg. Malygos pulled just as what passed for the brain of the monster registered the attack. The cadaverous proto-dragon fell onto its side. However, Malygos's tail briefly became tangled with the fiend, leaving Kalec's host vulnerable to the second undead. But a hard column of sand struck the creature, sending it flying. As it landed, a plume of flame draped over it. The dry flesh ignited. Despite that, the burning undead rose. So, too, did the first. Freeing his tail, Malygos swung in the opposite direction. This time, he knocked the first corpse toward the lake.
While Kalec's host had not done so with any other intention than to bowl his foe over, the sprawling undead landed just in front of Ysera. Adapting quickly, the smaller female used her tail to help the monster continue its slide-but in one particular direction. The struggling corpse plunged into the hole in the ice. It clawed the edges, seeking some hold. With the lightest tap of his hind paw, Neltharion made the ice shake. It was enough to put an end to what little hold the undead had. The shriveled proto-dragon vanished below. Through Malygos, Kalec caught a glimpse of the thing flowing away from the gap before sinking into the frozen depths. The other undead, entirely oblivious to the fire raging over its body, trudged toward Alexstrasza. Before she could exhale, Nozdormu unleashed another column of sand. The column hit squarely. Combined with the damage already inflicted by the flames, the sand shattered the creature, sending sizzling fragments all over the area. Some of those continued to move for several moments after landing, then gradually stilled. Moving out onto the ice, Malygos stared into the frozen lake. After a few seconds, he spotted the first undead. The creature once again moved toward the surface, still searching for a path out. Heading to the hole, Kalec's host exhaled on the opening. It took little effort to freeze the already sluggish liquid. The proto-dragon stepped back. Even if the undead did reach the hole, it would find no exit now. Malygos returned to the others. Neltharion was in the process of prodding various bits of burnt cadaver in order to assure himself that nothing remained animated. Nozdormu had once more started on his fish, and Alexstrasza was staring at the distant mountains, her expression thoughtful. Only Ysera paid attention to Malygos as he returned. Kalec's host eyed the remnants of the one creature. Something bothered him, but the proto-dragon did not know what. That stirred a similar concern in Kalec, who felt that he had also missed something earlier. The icy-blue male's head snapped up. He whirled to where he had left Tyr.
The body was gone. Only a few faint specks of blood decorated the impression Tyr's form had made. Leaping past the others, Malygos searched in every direction. Yet no matter where he looked, there was no trace, not even the least of trails. "Gone," Ysera murmured to him. "Gone." "Where? How?" She shrugged. The others had finally taken notice of the situation. They joined in a quick search, Neltharion even darting over the frozen lake, but all to no avail. "Lost. Tyr lost," Malygos snarled, angrier with himself than with anyone else. He considered Tyr his to protect. But while the proto-dragons continued what they obviously considered a fruitless hunt for the missing Tyr, Kalec, his only recourse to think, finally realized what had bothered him. When Malygos had turned toward the shore, fish in his mouth, his gaze had passed where Tyr had been set down. The only problem, Kalec now realized, was that Tyr had already vanished by then. Something had taken the keeper . . . something that Kalec could not help but think had done so with a purpose other than to eat. . . .
TWO UNDER GALAKROND'S EYE
"What now?" Neltharion asked. "What now?" Malygos gave it strong consideration, his mind darting over a number of choices with a clarity that impressed Kalec. However, it was Alexstrasza who answered first, firmly stating what Malygos had also concluded. "We must fight." There were no protests, no refusals. Both Malygos and Kalec were pleased by how quickly the rest agreed with her suggestion, and Kalec began to remember the leadership role that Alexstrasza had assumed as one of the five Great Aspects. His host also appeared relieved that some of the responsibility for their chances had been taken up by another. Even Ysera did not argue with the decision, although judging from her expression, she appeared to have doubts about something. Kalec guessed it had to do with her own strength. While she was very determined, she showed signs of not having recovered nearly as much as her companions, despite the meal. His host vaguely noticed the same but said nothing. Meanwhile, the others awaited Malygos's word on their course. His thoughts were still of import to them, he, after all, having been the one first picked for contact by Tyr. Malygos had been more than happy to turn to Tyr when the odd being had appeared. Tyr had looked so clever, so confident, and despite appearing smaller, he radiated a power far exceeding any individual proto-dragon's. Tyr was nowhere to be found, though, and there was no sign of what had taken him or in which direction they had gone. To a creature such as a protodragon, the most logical conclusion was that a beast had taken the body and even now was feasting on Tyr. And that left facing Galakrond to the five, with Malygos obviously seen by the others as one of the party's more clever planners. Kalec understood all that passed through the icy-blue male's mind, but he had additional considerations. More than ever, he was certain that something
with a more intelligent purpose had stolen Tyr away. Yet that availed Malygos and the rest of the proto-dragons nothing- Neltharion let out a warning hiss. The five immediately crouched low. Near the mountains, three figures slowly flew northeast. There was something in their movements that did not indicate the fluidity with which proto-dragons soared through the sky. Although they were fast, these flew with halting, almost haphazard motions. "Not-living," Nozdormu muttered. The three forms vanished among the peaks. Malygos hissed. He had noticed something that even Kalec had not seen at first. "Fly too smart. Not like others. Search too good. Not-living do not think. They eat. Only eat." Neltharion looked puzzled, but the other three understood what Malygos meant. So did Kalec. The animated corpses had acted with intelligence, something they entirely lacked. "Galakrond is their master," Alexstrasza blurted. "They hunt what he hunts." Malygos finished the thought. "And he hunts us. You said before. The notliving. They see us . . . Galakrond sees us." It was probably not quite so clear-cut as that, but Kalec, too, had no doubt that if the undead located them, Galakrond would find out. The behemoth evidently did have control over his emaciated victims. Indeed, it was surprising that, with two of them having just battled the defenders, Galakrond had not already appeared. Studying the land again, Malygos focused on the mountains. "We go there." Their gazes followed the direction in which he pointed his snout. The undead had only passed beyond that region a minute before. "They search there," Alexstrasza reminded Malygos. He shook his head. "No . . . they searched there before." There was logic to Malygos's thinking but not enough that Kalec would have readily agreed to such a course. However, Malygos's comrades were more amenable, nodding and following as the icy-blue male took off. Kalec was pleased to see that Malygos at least kept low to the ground, the choice in altitude more likely to keep the proto-dragons from being easily seen. They reached the mountains quickly, but not quickly enough for Malygos or Kalec. Kalec's host slipped in among the sharp peaks, seeking cover wherever
possible and watching for undead that might have done the same at Galakrond's direction. Turn here. Malygos did so instinctively before both he and Kalec wondered just who or what had told him to. It had not been a voice that his ears could hear, but his mind could. Confused, the proto-dragon pulled up short. Neltharion almost collided with him. The five hovered as Malygos all but spun in search of the speaker. But instead of finding that, he found Galakrond. His shadow covered the narrow pass through which they flew. The smaller proto-dragons instantly separated, heading to whatever overhang or other cover they could locate. It was not that any sought to abandon the others; they knew that their only chance was for them to scatter. There was not enough protection in any one direction for all five. The shadow spread everywhere. Yet it was nothing compared with the first glimpse of Galakrond's immense body hovering over the area. The huge protodragon kept passing above without end, so great had he grown. Malygos waited for Galakrond to completely pass-only to see the misshapen leviathan pause. One huge hind paw, large enough to grab at least three of them whole, came crashing down on a peak. A landslide commenced, tons of rock spilling down where Malygos knew that Alexstrasza and Nozdormu had taken different hiding places. The deadly downpour continued. It had not been done out of intention; Galakrond was just that heavy. Another landslide rumbled in the distance, where, no doubt, his other hind paw had settled. With somewhat ponderous movements, Galakrond shifted position. That resulted in additional collapses but nothing that threatened as much as the previous. A smaller forepaw-smaller only in comparison with the hind paws- came into view. Galakrond was backing up, possibly to search in the very region where they hid. Worse, even without yet bringing his head back, Galakrond had already inspected the vicinity, the extra eyes eagerly darting here and there. Malygos pressed harder against the rocks, certain more than once that he was spotted. Yet Galakrond did not leap back and thrust his head down in order to devour
him. Instead, the savage behemoth shifted around so that his forepaw became more evident, and then he moved forward again. The new landslides that action brought about were a small threat compared with not only the first but also what would have happened had Galakrond seen any of them. As the gargantuan proto-dragon's tail finally vanished over one peak, Malygos exhaled in the relief that both he and Kalec felt. The mountains around them shook. Scarcely a breath later, Galakrond's head thrust over the area. He did not look Malygos's way but stared down in the vicinity where Malygos remembered Ysera heading. The icy-blue male could not see her, but he was certain that the very shadows at which Galakrond stared most attentively were the ones hiding Alexstrasza's sister. The misshapen behemoth hissed. A hint of the foul mist he had earlier exhaled drifted from the massive jaws. Fortunately, it proved to be only an aftereffect of his breathing and not a focused assault. Still, Galakrond continued to try to see what lay in the shadows below. He did not glow anymore, a fact that worked to the smaller proto-dragons' favor, as the glow would have been strong enough to illuminate most, if not all, of the shadowed region. Suddenly, Galakrond began coughing. Within seconds, the coughing grew so intense that Malygos wondered if perhaps they might be saved by Galakrond simply succumbing to whatever afflicted him. That was not to be, though, for after a few thunderous moments, the coughing subsided. But during that fit, Kalec observed minute changes in Galakrond. Some of the extra appendages and eyes shrank, and a few even shriveled to little more than mottled flesh. Even when the fit ended, those did not revert to how they had been before. Kalec feared that his host would miss what he now noticed, but soon discovered that he had underestimated Malygos. Suppressing a hiss, Malygos stored the knowledge away as he waited for Galakrond to depart. After another brief study of the area below, Galakrond finally moved on. However, Malygos did not move for several minutes afterward, nor could he see any of the others shifting position. After the sudden return, none of the five wanted to take the chance that Galakrond might come back.
Finally risking himself, Malygos darted from his hiding place to where he had seen Alexstrasza disappear. The remnants of the landslide at her location at first concerned him greatly. However, as he neared, she thrust her snout out of the deeper shadows and sniffed the air before fully coming into sight. "The others?" she asked worriedly, her greatest concern without a doubt for her sister. Malygos could only shrug. They headed to where Nozdormu had last been seen and where even more rocks buried much of the area. Unlike Alexstrasza, though, Nozdormu sat perched atop the rubble, waiting expectantly for his comrades. "Hurt?" he asked both. When they shook their heads, he stretched his wings. The left one moved noticeably more slowly than the right. "Pain . . . but only pain." Despite Nozdormu sounding unperturbed, Kalec could tell that Malygos and Alexstrasza were concerned. A minor injury could still slow Nozdormu at a critical time. For all of her worry over Nozdormu, Alexstrasza changed the subject to one dearer to her. "Ysera?" "Here." The yellowish female alighted just behind her sister. "Safe." To Kalec, Ysera sounded slightly annoyed, as if she did not want her sibling to be so fearful for her, despite the dangerous predicament through which they had come. They waited a moment more before Malygos cautiously asked what was probably on all their minds. "Neltharion?" None of the others offered news. Malygos hissed. Taking flight, he soared toward the charcoal-gray male's last known location . . . only to pull back abruptly at what he found. The spot Neltharion had chosen had been hit by far more rubble than any of the other locations. Eyeing it, Malygos could not imagine any hope of survival. Kalec shared his doubt, despite managing to recall that Neltharion should survive-to eventually become Deathwing. Then a faint sound farther on attracted Malygos. Simultaneously, Alexstrasza and the others alighted next to Kalec's host. They, too, heard the sound.
Scrambling over the rocks, Malygos discovered that the overhang the charcoal-gray male had rushed to extended farther than first assumed. While that offered hope, the fact that part of the overhang had also collapsed under the weight of the avalanches did not. Neltharion might still be alive, but what condition was he in? The sound arose again, this time nearly under Malygos's paws. He leapt back, concerned that his weight might be crushing his companion. Malygos planted his head against the rubble. He heard movement, followed by the intake of breath. "Here!" With his hind paws, he began excavating the pile. The others took up positions nearby, Alexstrasza helping to shovel away the rocks that Malygos pushed back. Nozdormu moved to help Malygos with his task, only to have Ysera shove her way in front of him. She began digging with earnest. Nozdormu finally joined Alexstrasza in clearing away what had been dug up so that Malygos and Ysera could shovel more from where Neltharion had been buried. It grew silent below them. That made Malygos dig harder, but to his surprise, Ysera dug harder yet. She moved at a manic pace, and although Kalec's host did not think about it, Kalec understood that she had to be thinking of those Talonixa had buried alive. Ysera did not want Neltharion suffering such a fate, even though a part of Kalec wished that the proto-dragons would leave Neltharion to perish. A future without Deathwing was something generations of creatures on Azeroth would have been very grateful for. But Malygos and the others worked diligently to rescue one who was their friend. Ysera let out a hiss and used her weaker forepaws to pull a rock away. That revealed part of a wing. It was immediately evident that Neltharion's wings had been pinned around him, which explained his inability to assist in his own rescue. One thing that had saved him, though, was that the part of the overhang where his head lay had remained intact. Had it collapsed, Neltharion's skull would have been crushed like an egg. The future Deathwing hacked as he tried to breathe in fresh air, the manner of his near death an irony not lost on Kalec, who knew that Neltharion would somehow become the Aspect of Earth. Still pinned, he had to wait as Malygos and Ysera uncovered the entire wing before he was able to move. Once the
wing was free, Neltharion started stretching it, which also enabled him to use one of his forepaws. While weak compared with his hind paws, it was still capable of shoving away more of the rocks keeping him trapped. As they freed Neltharion, his injuries became more apparent. While, like Nozdormu, he had survived intact, severe bruises covered his body, and blood spattered him in several places. There were some rips in his wings, but a glance by Malygos revealed none that looked as if it would impair the charcoal-gray male's flying. Neltharion stumbled to his paws. He twisted his neck around and looked up. "Galakrond?" "Gone," Malygos replied. "For now . . ." "So powerful," Ysera muttered as she stepped closer. "So powerful! What can we do?" Her sister did not hesitate. "Fight . . . or die." Neltharion, his breath recovered, snorted. "Hmmph! Probably die." But immediately, he added, "Better to die fighting, though." "Better to die fighting, yes," Malygos agreed, eyeing Alexstrasza most of all. "Better to live after, though." "Better, yes," she echoed. But just how they could do that was a tremendous question. First and foremost, they had to find another place to hide while they considered how to combat what appeared invincible. Follow the ridge. While the thought had eased into Malygos's mind with such subtlety that the proto-dragon did not realize it was not his own, Kalec knew that it had come from elsewhere. He could not identify its source; it did not sound like Tyr, who surely would have identified himself. And if it was another keeper, why would the speaker not say so? Curiously, it reminded Kalec of something, but just what escaped him. And in truth, he had to admit, it mattered not. Kalec still had no part in this endless vision except as an imprisoned observer. While he railed at that, it was the only existence he knew . . . or, at least, remembered at the moment. But I have another life! Kalec suddenly insisted to himself. The-the Nexus and -and-
There was a name the blue dragon wanted-no, needed-to recall. Not his own. He had remembered it only a short time ago. A female name. One Kalec should have known well-and one that more often had been part of his thoughts before these visions had overtaken him. That realization at last stirred some of those forgotten memories. Ja-Jalya? Jay-Jaina? Jaina! His most immediate recollections returned full-blown. Jaina was possibly trying to enter the Nexus, and if she was, she was in grave danger. I have to save her! I have to- The vision abruptly faded. The darkness that Kalec had so often cried out against he now welcomed wholeheartedly, if only it would bring him back to the Nexus. Something hard lay against him, or, rather, he lay against a hard surface. Despite being unable to see it, Kalec had to assume that it was the floor of the chamber, and that further encouraged him. He tried to summon enough strength to move some part of his body. Ka- He knew that voice, but he wondered again whose it was. Jaina. It was Jaina. He had already forgotten. How can this be? How can I keep forgetting? The artifact. Kalec now discovered he had forgotten the accursed relic! Kalec? Jaina's voice came clearer but fainter. She repeated his name, but this time, he could barely hear her. In desperation, Kalec tried to reach out. To his surprise, he felt his nails- claws?-scrape the floor. The act sent shivers through his nerves, but he welcomed that discomfort for the slight sense of reality it gave him. He focused on that and on Jaina, trying to create a more powerful anchor by combining both. Kalec! Listen to me! Her voice came stronger again. Simultaneously, the blue dragon managed to scrape the floor a second time. Sensation began to return to his body. He felt the blood flowing through his limbs and torso. What sounded like breathing- whether his own or hers, he could not say-echoed in his ears.
Jaina! Jaina! Kalec cursed his mouth, which still did not function. He had to let her know that he could hear her- A distant roar drowned out Jaina's voice just as she repeated his name. The roar shook Kalec, not only because of its suddenness but also because he knew it not as a dragon's but as a proto-dragon's. Jaina! Jai- Kalec hesitated. Did he have the name right? And whose name was it, anyway? A female's, certainly, but the only females he was familiar with were Alexstrasza and her sister Ysera. Had he tried to call one of them? The darkness faded . . . and he and Malygos, as it had always been, flew together. But this time, Kalec knew that things had changed. He could not say how, though. He still existed as some hidden part of Malygos, ever there observing. Kalec didn't know how that had begun; he only knew that he was and would always be linked to his proto-dragon host. And forgotten completely, at least for now and perhaps always, was a future where a frightened female voice continued to call his name in vain. •   •   • Jaina collapsed. Her plan had failed. She had made an ambitious attempt to bind herself to the link between the artifact and Kalec so she could, by matching the pulsations, reach out better to the unconscious dragon. In this manner, the archmage had intended to draw him to her and, thus, back to reality. But the artifact had proved to have the greater hold on him. For a few moments, Jaina had almost succeeded. However, the bond she had forged had been cut without warning. The relic had corrected for her intrusion, just as it had for a time corrected for her attempts to invade the Nexus in the first place. And yet . . . Jaina pushed herself up from the floor, also using that moment to study Kalec. His breathing perfectly coincided with the artifact's pulsations. His body had contorted more, becoming less humanoid but not quite that of a dragon. There were traits growing on him, especially his torso, that did not remind her of any of those she had seen among the various dragonflights, yet they were still vaguely familiar. She had seen them before. Some other creature-what was it? Jaina Proudmoore had studied virtually every major beast during her training. Members of the Kirin Tor had to know
the flora and fauna of Azeroth for a variety of reasons, many of them dealing with survival. This one she had definitely seen- A proto-dragon? It did not seem possible. While she was aware that Kalec could assume more than one form, Jaina had no idea why he would take on that of something akin to a dragon but not nearly so powerful. Still, when she took a closer look, more proto-dragon traits became apparent. Worse, one of Kalec's arms was clearly shorter than it should have been, another change that added to his similarity to the beasts. Kalec suddenly let out a loud roar, not quite like that of a dragon. As he did, he altered further. His feet became more ponderous, as the hind limbs of protodragons were when compared with their forelimbs. And at the same time, the artifact's pulsations grew more rapid. The relic's aura intensified, and it enveloped Kalec, too. Jaina reached for him, only to nearly singe her fingertips. There had been no trace of heat from the aura before, but now it burned like fire. Kalec's shifting continued unchecked. His body darkened. The archmage shielded herself and tried a second time to get to Kalec, only to retreat from even stronger heat. Gasping, Jaina saw also that Kalec's breathing quickened more, ever matching the increase in the artifact's pulsations. This can't go on long! It can't! Jaina understood all too well that there would come a point where his body could not withstand this mad metamorphosis. A creature of magic he might be, but he still had mortal limitations. Kalec, although he was a dragon, would literally burn out, and thus far, Jaina had no idea how to save him.
THREE FIVE AGAINST THE IMPOSSIBLE
Malygos and Kalec followed the ridge just as the voice in the proto-dragon's head had suggested, but if they expected something spectacular or startling at the end, they were both disappointed. Instead, the mountains opened up into a bowl-shaped valley that, for some reason, bothered Kalec. Malygos simply saw it as another destination, one that Galakrond perhaps would not search or already had searched and abandoned. A stream flowed through the area. The five proto-dragons landed to drink. And think. Never in their lives had they had to think so much. Glancing at the others, Malygos wondered if they felt as worn out as he did. He blinked. Far beyond the five, a rounded rock drifted where the water widened. Even proto-dragons knew that rocks did not drift, so Malygos fluttered up into the air and flew to the object. Kalec's host veered back the moment he recognized what it was that lay halfsubmerged. As Malygos had suspected, it was another proto-dragon body. However, as he finally dared to alight next to it in the stream, he noticed something peculiar. A splash behind him announced Neltharion's more enthusiastic arrival. Striding up to Malygos, the charcoal-gray male scrutinized the find. "Dead. Galakrond. We should destroy before it rises." Malygos shook his head. "Already did. This was not-living that is again dead." The other proto-dragon let out a snort of disbelief. He prodded the corpse, which, having already been rotting before its second "death," now easily began breaking apart in the water. "How can not-living be not-living again unless we destroy it?" Kalec, ever paying attention, also wondered. His first inclination was that either another proto-dragon had managed to do as Neltharion suggested, or the undead had, for some reason, simply collapsed. Yet Kalec had seen no evidence of the second occurring, and his host was also disinclined to that answer.
Which only left the question of who had indeed destroyed this fiend. Another keeper? Malygos leaned closer. His sharp sense of smell detected another scent, one that at first he assumed had to be there for a very logical reason. Then, as he eyed the decaying remains, something else about their condition registered. Before, they had looked dry. Now, they were barely holding together. When Malygos did a little prodding of his own, the part not yet touched by the flowing water simply crumbled to ash. As that happened, the scent-or stench-Kalec's host had smelled increased tenfold. The source escaped Neltharion's mouth before the other proto-dragon even knew why he spoke the name. "Galakrond!" "No Galakrond!" Malygos interjected. In a more subdued voice, he added, "Not anymore." "What do you mean?" Even Kalec was not sure of Malygos's thoughts at that moment, for what little he could read from them did not make sense. Yet Malygos quickly verified those questionable thoughts. "Galakrond was here. Galakrond . . . devoured this not-living." Neltharion looked at him as if he were mad. The other three, just joining to see what fascinated the pair so much, had heard Malygos's declaration. "Galakrond ate this . . . this not-living?" Nozdormu asked in utter puzzlement. "Already ate it alive! Why eat it dead?" "What's left to eat, then?" asked Alexstrasza, sniffing at the corpse and wrinkling her nose. "Galakrond, yes. Not long ago." The female's eyes narrowed in thought. "Malygos is right." "But this was dead!" Neltharion insisted. "Long dead! No meat! No life!" Indeed, there was only the growing odor of rot. However, Malygos smelled a wrongness in that rot, as if something else tied to it also escaped at the same time. "This lived. This died," he began, seeking to organize his words enough to make sure that everyone-himself included-understood the full extent. "Became not-living. Moves but is dead. Dead but moves."
Kalec was naturally the first one to grasp what Malygos was leading up to. Even as a former Aspect of Magic, Kalec doubted that he would have come to what was the only possible conclusion before his young host had. Of the other four proto-dragons, it was Ysera who comprehended quickest. "Not-living move. Something moves them. No blood. No life. But something." " 'Not-life'?" Neltharion muttered. "They have 'not-life'?" The proto-dragons had not lived long in a world full of undead, as Kalec abruptly recalled he had, but they had come to grasp an important point. Still, the animated corpses of Galakrond's victims were not exactly like most of the beings the blue dragon gradually remembered having confronted. What drove these appeared merely to be as Malygos hinted, a force that was perhaps a byproduct of Galakrond's absorption of the living creatures' life essence. It was almost a parody of that essence, which made calling it "not-life" very appropriate. But to go from that step to Galakrond now absorbing this essence was disturbing. Why? Kalec asked himself, aware that he echoed Malygos in this regard. Why? Again, it was Kalec's host who discovered the possible reason. Malygos raised his head and looked off in the distance. Only Kalec knew that he listened for something in particular. "No cries," Malygos rasped. "No calls." "All fear Galakrond," Alexstrasza pointed out. "All flee or hide . . . or die." "Galakrond still grows, still changes. Proto-dragons grow when they eat enough." The icy-blue male used his wings to indicate the mountains. "Nothing else for Galakrond. Nothing big enough. Nothing simple . . . except not-living." Even though all five understood now, Kalec saw through Malygos that they nevertheless did not want to accept such facts. Galakrond devouring what animated the undead was to them like the behemoth moving far beyond cannibalism. However, what bothered Kalec most was what this new and horrific feeding meant for Galakrond's continuing metamorphosis. If absorbing the essence of his victims had turned him into such a misshapen monster, it followed that this would only twist him more.
The five proto-dragons took no heart in the possibility that the number of undead might eventually be eradicated by Galakrond's hunger. They knew that the foremost focus of Galakrond's existence remained seeking out living prey, especially them. To Malygos, that gave him no choice. Still, once again, he tried to keep the rest from what appeared a doomed quest. Malygos looked to the other four. "Must face Galakrond. Now. Alone." "No." Alexstrasza pushed herself into the middle of the group. "We are family. We fight together. Always." She did not mean family in the sense that they were simply loyal friends but, rather, as if the five of them were of a like color and appearance, born from the same kind of eggs. There was no deeper connection. "Yes," Neltharion agreed, with some indignation at Malygos's initial suggestion. "We fight as family! We fight together!" "But we are not family," Ysera countered. "We fight differently. Not same." She did not say it in denial of her sister's words but with the tone that those differences were still important. Malygos nodded, having considered that and also seeing it as their greatest strength. Perhaps their only hope, too. "We fight differently," he said. "We fight together. More. We use differences. Tyr showed some, but Tyr not proto-dragon. Not plan like protodragons. We must plan like proto-dragons." It made the only sense to Malygos, although Kalec was not quite so certain. Tyr, for all his might, for all his obvious wisdom, had led the five as if they fought like him. He had used their individual abilities, yes, but in terms of complementing his own. He had been fighting a proto-dragon-a huge protodragon-as if facing something like himself. But Tyr had been correct in that their individual abilities could work in concert better than if they had all been of one true family. Five Malygoses would not have had a better chance. Five Neltharions would not have. And Malygos also had to admit that not every combination of five different proto-dragons could have worked together as well as when Tyr had led them. He could only imagine what a group that included someone like Coros would have done against Galakrond.
We have not won, Malygos curtly reminded himself. More likely, we will lose everything. But even more than for himself, Malygos remained concerned for his four companions. He had to make certain that he guided them as best as possible, and that meant using their different skills to their utmost. I am only a proto-dragon! The thought jolted through Malygos with such force that Kalec also felt the flash of fear. Still, all Malygos had to do was look at Neltharion and the rest-who, in turn, waited for his word-to know that there was no retreating from his dominant role. But there was another who seemed willing to help take much of the burden from him. He looked to Alexstrasza. She already appeared to understand his concern. With a brief, solemn glance at Malygos, Alexstrasza immediately focused on Neltharion. "How do your kind fight? Tell us . . . show us." Neltharion bared his teeth in a reptilian grin. He spread his wings and began to display the fighting skills of his family- The vision shifted, but while Kalec would have liked to know more about the abilities of the other four, he was not surprised about the change. In fact, for the first time, the blue dragon felt comfortable with the shift. He did not see that this might not be a good sign for him. The scene before him could not be taking place all that long after the previous one. The five remained in the mountains, but now they perched atop part of a crooked peak, watching and waiting. But the sky remained conspicuously devoid of a creature so vast he could hardly be hiding. There were also no signs of the undead, which disturbed the group's leader. "Where is Galakrond?" Malygos growled. "Where?" He stretched his wings restlessly before finally understanding what they had to do. "Must bring him to us! Must let him know about us!" He let out a roar. As he expected, it echoed throughout the mountains. Yet to his ears, it did not sound nearly loud enough. Before Malygos could suggest it, Alexstrasza raised her head and repeated his call. The other three imitated her, all five within seconds shouting as one.
The echoes of their combined cries resounded, even building as they rushed away from their source. As loud as they were, it would still have been impossible for most normal proto-dragons to hear them unless they were within two or three hours' flight away. But then, there was nothing normal anymore about Galakrond. Thunder rose in the east, thunder with an oddly regular pattern. No, not thunder, Malygos finally deduced. Only the beating of very, very large wings. And as the rest of the five turned in that direction, the heavens there darkened. A Galakrond half again as huge as when they had previously seen him moved ponderously toward the five. He hacked and coughed every now and then, and each time he did, the aura faded slightly. Malygos took note of that as he rose from his perch. Not for a moment did he think that Galakrond would fall easy prey to them, if defeating him was at all possible. However, any potential weakness had to be exploited if there was any hope for the proto-dragons. Confident that the others knew their parts, Malygos flew without hesitation toward Galakrond. The behemoth ceased coughing. The aura returned. Galakrond stared at the puny figures approaching-and laughed. The mountains shook at the sound, which would have easily drowned out the smaller cries Malygos and his companions had uttered earlier. "Little morsels!" he bellowed almost congenially. "There you are!" The five defenders said nothing. They spread out as they approached. "My meals grow dry, so dry," Galakrond continued merrily. "Nasty taste, but I am so hungry. . . ." The brutal eyes focused on Malygos. "I am alwaysss hungry." He exhaled. The five had been waiting for just such a move. They immediately rose higher in the sky and also separated farther. The noxious mist unloosed by Galakrond spread far and wide, but in trying to keep all five in range, the misshapen behemoth instead came up short against each. Ysera came closest to
being caught at the edge of the mist, but a hard push by the yellowish female saved her at the last second. Hiding his relief at her narrow escape, Malygos bore down on Galakrond from above. The icy-blue proto-dragon opened wide and attacked. The column of frost shot toward the gigantic Galakrond, who met the tiny assault with another mocking laugh. At that point, Alexstrasza shot in and grazed a long section of Galakrond's torso with flame. Against the hard hide, the fire did little. Against the extra eyes, it did much more. They melted like butter. They dissolved like water. They blackened like wood. With expert aim, Alexstrasza destroyed every eye in a broad section of Galakrond's left side before immediately soaring far out of sight. The monstrous proto-dragon roared, but this time in a tone that brought grim pleasure to Malygos and Kalec. Galakrond had experienced pain that he had not suffered even against Tyr. "I will devour you first!" he shouted at the vanishing Alexstrasza. "I will savor your life! I will make you one of mine, and then I will devour you again!" Malygos could not help shuddering as he continued with his part of the attack. All five faced the same potential fate: being turned into one of the notliving and then having even that existence serve as a bitter but still desired snack. No sooner had Galakrond turned to look after Alexstrasza than a column of sand coursed over the other side of his torso. Spread in much the same manner as Alexstrasza's flames, Nozdormu's assault also concentrated on whatever extra eyes had grown there. At such velocity, the sand cut like tiny claws, at the very least blinding by irritation but more often scoring and scratching orbs until no ability for returning sight remained. And as the fire-orange female had done, Nozdormu shot off in another direction. Tyr had made some use of the methods by which proto-dragons fought, but that use had been tempered by his non-proto-dragon mind. Malygos's kind- meaning all families-preferred to hunt alone, but when there was the need to go after very large prey, proto-dragons became adept pack hunters. Packs kept their prey off-balance and fought as partners. Tyr had failed in the end because
he had chosen to make himself the primary threat against Galakrond. The lack of equal coordination between Tyr and the five had been the reason for their failure then. Together, Malygos and Alexstrasza had sought to correct that mistake. They only hoped that they had not simply found another path to failure. There would be no third chance. They fought and won here, or they fought and perished here-and if Tyr was correct in one thing, after their destruction, there would be no hope for their world. Concern for more than where his next meal came from was not something Malygos would have ever believed possible for himself. He knew that the others had come to be like him; they feared not only for themselves but for everything. They were even willing to sacrifice their lives if it meant saving their world. Malygos had thus far been the only one of the three to remain dangerously near Galakrond. He now became the rapidly more infuriated monster's center of attention once again. But Galakrond did not exhale, as Malygos had calculated he would. Instead, the leviathan reached down with both hind paws and ripped away parts of the nearest mountains. He did so with such speed that Malygos was only just banking away when the huge chunks of solid earth came hurtling after him. One missile passed Malygos barely a breath later. The icy-blue male gritted his teeth as he waited for the second to do the same. Unfortunately, it caught his left wing hard instead. The impact first spun Malygos around. The agony stirred up nearly forgotten pain from previous injuries, but that meant little compared with the short, rapid glimpses of Galakrond that the smaller proto-dragon caught while tumbling in the sky. Galakrond took up more and more of his view each time, and yet Malygos could not right himself any faster. Worse, he saw that not only were all four of Galakrond's major paws filled with more dirt and rock, but those extra appendages that Malygos could make out were doing the same. The terrifying behemoth unleashed an immense barrage with only one obvious purpose, ensuring that Kalec's host would not escape destruction. Despite the peril to Malygos, he wondered where Ysera was. She had been set to attack when next Malygos distracted their foe, and regardless of Malygos's
own fate, he had expected the others to carry on. But instead of Ysera, it was Neltharion who dived into the fray, ignoring the part of the plan he was supposed to undertake. He shrieked loudly as he neared Galakrond's ear, more loudly, in fact, than Malygos could ever recall the charcoal-gray male roaring. The sonic attack literally shook Galakrond, so close had Neltharion dared to get. A storm of rock and earth rained down on the mountains as the misshapen beast involuntarily released his hold on nearly everything. Growing too confident, Neltharion remained to watch his assault a moment longer than sense indicated. For that, he received a hard blow as Galakrond's wing swept forward. Malygos saw their plan collapsing faster than Tyr's. He had thought that he and Alexstrasza understood their own kind better than the two-legged being had. Of course, Galakrond, for all his transformation, was also still a protodragon. In some ways having forgotten that, Malygos wondered if he and his companions had simply flown into certain doom. He started forward to help his rescuer, only to have Alexstrasza fly in before him. Like Ysera, apparently, she had abandoned their strike-and-retreat plan, but unlike her missing sister, the fire-orange female had not abandoned her comrades any more than Neltharion had. Coming from the side where she had blinded Galakrond by searing away his extra eyes, Alexstrasza raced toward the massive gullet. As she closed, she did what Malygos and Kalec thought looked like a choice of suicide. Alexstrasza briefly roared. It was enough to draw Galakrond's eager attention. Anticipating devouring a tidy morsel, his jaws opened wider. Alexstrasza exhaled, clearly using every bit of breath she had. A huge plume of fire raked over the gargantuan proto-dragon's inner mouth, an area as unprotected as the eyes. The soft flesh near the gullet blackened. Galakrond reared back, all thought of devouring the female proto-dragon gone. Malygos watched, wide-eyed, astounded that their fearsome adversary still had such a tender area. He had thought the region within the maw might be vulnerable, but targeting that had been too much to ask of any of his comrades. What proto-dragon would willingly fly into Galakrond's mouth?
Alexstrasza, it seemed. Galakrond began to hack and cough. He violently shook his head. His pained roar resounded so loudly in the mountains that it threatened to deafen the others. Wings flapping, he pushed higher into the sky. The hacking and coughing continued as Galakrond swung his head to and fro in an attempt to ease the burning. Alexstrasza continued on to Neltharion, who remained aloft but still suffered visible disorientation. She reached out with her hind paws to take his shoulders and guide him to safety. Over the mountains, Galakrond's cry came to an abrupt halt. The hacking and coughing faded a moment after. The malevolent eyes of the huge protodragon swept over the vicinity. Although it clearly aggravated his new injuries, Galakrond exhaled long and wide. At the same time, his gaze went beyond Malygos. A sense of foreboding stirred within Malygos, and he hurriedly looked over his shoulder. More than a dozen not-living converged from behind him, cutting off that path. Malygos understood then that Galakrond had also planned ahead-and with better success. The angle at which the not-living flew revealed that they had come from above the cloud cover. Having only found the destroyed corpse, Malygos had assumed that the rest had followed that one into oblivion. Instead, Galakrond had at least Malygos, Neltharion, and Alexstrasza trapped between the undead and the will-sapping mist. Nozdormu appeared on Galakrond's other blinded side. He assailed the exhaling monster with one sand blast after another, obviously using himself up but as aware as Malygos of the dire circumstances. Without turning his head to the brown proto-dragon, Galakrond brought his tail up and, with perfect aim, struck Nozdormu hard. Stunned, Nozdormu collided with one peak. Chunks of rock flew free. They dropped in among the mountains, accompanied by the limp body of the brown male. And as the tail withdrew, an increasingly frantic Malygos saw that, like the rest of Galakrond's macabre form, it had eyes. Eyes that more than made up for those lost to the smaller attackers.
Galakrond continued his impossibly long exhalation. Malygos retreated backward as the cloying mist closed on him. Alexstrasza, still aiding the disoriented Neltharion, was easily caught up in the mist. She attempted to thrust Neltharion ahead of her, but although he tried to fly harder, it was not enough. A ragged hiss from behind Malygos was his only warning that he had nearly flown into the approaching undead. Kalec's host spun to face the new threat, well aware that doing so also enabled the mist to cut the distance to its victim. A hungry pack of undead or a fog that would leave him easy prey for their even hungrier master. Malygos anxiously looked back and forth, trying to find some path to freedom. The mist blanketed everything above and below, and the animated corpses blocked all routes ahead. There was nowhere for the icy-blue male to fly. And as death encroached from all directions, Malygos and Kalec wondered what had happened to the one missing member of the failed venture. Where was Ysera?
FOUR THE FIVE
Jaina knelt between Kalec and the artifact, caught between the knowledge that she needed to work fast to save the blue dragon and the great desire to hold and comfort him if these were to be his last minutes no matter what she attempted. Kalec continued his grisly metamorphosis, the proto-dragon elements far more pronounced and the rate of his breathing so rapid that the archmage could not believe that his lungs had not already exploded. This can't be what this device was meant for! Jaina insisted to herself. It makes no sense! She concentrated on the pulsating artifact. Her eyes widened as she noticed that what she had believed to be a single solid object actually had two components. "He found something," Buniq had said. Buniq, who could vanish without a trace even when very near the archmage. But no sooner had she started to make some connection between the mysterious taunka and the discovery of the second part than Jaina felt as if someone watched her. The spellcaster quickly looked up beyond the artifact. There was no one there-or, rather, no one there now. Yet a peculiar thought ran through Jaina's mind, the thought that she had seen someone. Not a dragon and not a human but something closer to the latter in shape. As she concentrated, the archmage imagined that it had been a cloaked and hooded figure a bit taller than even Kalec in his humanoid form. Jaina knew something of keepers, and while they were much taller-like giants, actually-she was certain that they had the power to make themselves be seen otherwise. Yet even if that was the case, if she had seen some keeper image, Jaina wondered why it had faded away so quickly. I didn't imagine it. . . . It stood there. And it had not appeared until Jaina had begun to investigate the fact that there were two components to the artifact, not one.
That also brought her back to Buniq, whom she increasingly considered something other than a taunka. It would not be difficult for a keeper to take on such an illusion, either. Certain that she had come upon the right track, Jaina investigated where the two pieces looked as if they were fused together. Had it not been for her expert eye, the archmage doubted that she would have noticed. Moreover, they were also blended together by spellwork. Spellwork . . . Jaina thought again of how she had first confronted the artifact. Perhaps her attack had been too broad for this part of the situation. Re-creating the symbol, she studied the bonds between the two components, then cast. The image draped over the smaller part and, thus, where it was sealed to the larger. As that took place, Jaina reinforced her personal spells yet again. She had no idea what might happen, but experience had taught her to expect the worst. Both parts flared white, blinding her. The archmage fell back, certain that the relic was about to either explode or strike hard against her. Instead, the bright illumination faded, and the smaller component turned half a circle. Blinking, Jaina tentatively reached for it. A stream of white energy struck her forehead. She jolted, but out of surprise, not pain. And suddenly, Jaina saw . . . •   •   • The world rippled. It did so in a manner Kalec had not experienced before. He felt as if one moment washed over another like waves in the sea. It was disconcerting, even more so because everything he viewed through Malygos's eyes flowed on just like waves, too. The mist drew closer and closer, Galakrond behind it. And when Malygos glanced back at the undead, it was the same. As if made of water, they spilled toward him, an image that only served to make them even ghastlier. We are going to die, Kalec thought with both dread and wonder. He had not believed that Malygos could die, but his memories of his own time had grown so vague that Kalec wondered if they were memories at all or merely fancies.
But that hardly mattered. All that mattered was that he and his host were about to perish in some gruesome manner. A mournful roar interrupted Kalec's thoughts and drew Malygos's notice. The icy-blue male turned to the sound. Something else had drawn Galakrond's attention, a pitiful but still-fiery plume exhaled by a straining Alexstrasza. Behind her, Neltharion-oncepowerful Neltharion-struggled just to stay aloft. It was immediately clear that Alexstrasza wanted Neltharion to fly off, but he fought to stay near, as if he could help. Galakrond sneered. Malygos forgotten for the moment, the behemoth exhaled lightly at Alexstrasza, sending another gust of his foul mist over her. What fight the fire-orange female had managed to draw up faded. Worse, in her struggle to keep her wings flapping, Alexstrasza drifted toward their gigantic foe. Galakrond opened his mouth wide. He waited with amusement as Alexstrasza unwittingly continued toward the massive jaws. Malygos threw himself forward, choosing the mist over the undead. Kalec was glad for his choice, even as the mist began sapping both their wills, for at least the rippling ceased as soon as that happened. Whatever their fates, the five had shown themselves to be as loyal to one another as any true dragon. Each had tried to save one or more of the others, never shirking, never fearful of death- No . . . not five. Four . . . That thought faded with all others as the mist proved too great for Malygos. His charge had turned out to be as futile as Talonixa's grand one. His wings slowed. It was all he could do to force them to move fast enough to keep him from falling to his death. Which meant that there was nothing he could do for either Neltharion or, more imminently, Alexstrasza. As Malygos and Kalec's own struggle worsened, they saw that the fireorange female registered her doom. She managed a few flaps that slowed her, but already the jaws began to close on her. Something dropped onto Galakrond near the side blinded by Alexstrasza's earlier attack. It landed hard, and as it did, a great gust of sand swept over the
gargantuan proto-dragon's head, blanketing it. Kalec and his host vaguely made out a battered Nozdormu fighting for a hold as he exhaled again and again. Galakrond sought to shake Nozdormu off. The brown proto-dragon flopped back and forth but kept claws secured. Nozdormu looked very weak, and that he had somehow managed to return to attack Galakrond anew amazed Malygos and Kalec. But what appeared to be hope for Alexstrasza faded as Galakrond, clearly seeing Nozdormu as more of a nuisance, once more concentrated his focus on her. The respite had not been enough to allow her any true chance of escape. It didn't even help that, in trying to rid himself of Nozdormu, the monstrous leviathan had forced away much of the mist. Having inhaled so much of it, Alexstrasza, like Malygos and Neltharion, could not recover in time. Nozdormu let loose with one last blast of sand. It slammed into Galakrond's brow, but as hard as it hit, it was already evident that the blow would not even distract their horrific foe for more than another breath. Yet that was not Nozdormu's full intention, for barely had he brought Galakrond's attention toward him when the blast shifted downward and clogged the huge protodragon's nostrils. Galakrond instinctively opened his maw wider in search of air- And in that critical moment, a slighter, yellowish female proto-dragon placed herself before Galakrond and exhaled into his mouth. He pulled back his head, his expression peculiar. As the mist faded from Malygos and Kalec, they recalled the effect of Ysera's breath weapon, in some ways akin to that of Galakrond, if not so debilitating. Ysera did not go to Alexstrasza as Malygos had assumed. Instead, she did the unthinkable-again-and continued her mad assault on Galakrond, all the while keeping herself between him and her sister. Kalec and his host saw that they had underestimated Ysera; perhaps she had been hesitant in her role, but she had not abandoned Alexstrasza or the rest of them. Indeed, it became clear that Ysera had been the one to aid the injured Nozdormu in reaching Galakrond and that Nozdormu's attacks had all been designed as feints for Ysera. Ysera . . . and, perhaps unintentionally, Malygos.
His mind clear, the icy-blue male knew that they would not have another chance. Galakrond hovered, disoriented, but that would not last much longer. If Malygos could- A hiss warned him of a threat that he had forgotten. Yet when Malygos turned to face the undead, he found them flying even more haphazardly and, in one case, fighting each other. At first perplexed, Malygos realized that Galakrond's disorientation had affected his rotting slaves. Malygos exhaled on the fighting pair, sending them falling frozen together. He wanted to deal with the rest, but Ysera's warning roar brought him back to Galakrond. Alexstrasza's sister raced about Galakrond's head, exhaling into the monster's mouth and slashing with her claws elsewhere. Her adversary kept shaking his head in what seemed irritation but was still a need to clear his mind of the effects of her breath weapon. Malygos admired Ysera's efforts thus far but could not help noticing that Galakrond's eyes were becoming more focused. Worse, with a great snort, he finally managed to force the sand from his nostrils, at which point he inhaled huge gasps of air to help speed his recovery. But in observing all this, Malygos forged a plan. It was akin to a past attack they had tried against Galakrond, but in that attempt, they had fought more as individuals and not as one. Moreover, Galakrond had not been as huge as he currently was. If the five could do as Malygos had earlier dreamed . . . He rushed to Neltharion, who had at last shaken off his own stupor. "Come! Hurry!" To his credit, the charcoal-gray male followed without question. Malygos soared to one of the peaks shattered in the struggle. Huge, jagged chunks of stone clung precariously to the mountains of which they had once been wholly a part. Malygos eyed the largest and sharpest one that two proto-dragons could possibly carry with their hind paws. "Help me!" Between Neltharion and him, they broke the fragment free. Malygos guided them back to a path toward Galakrond. As the behemoth came into sight, Malygos saw that Alexstrasza had done as he had thought she would: the instant her head had cleared, she had gone to stand with her sister. Now the pair flew in from opposing sides, moving almost as if reading each other's thoughts. They struck simultaneously, keeping Galakrond from choosing one victim over the
other. In the process, they also served to prevent him from noticing the two males' approach. But while the sisters and Galakrond saw only one another, Nozdormu caught sight of Malygos and Neltharion. He also saw the rock they brought with them. Whether or not Nozdormu understood just what they planned to do with it, he evidently realized that they needed to get much closer. Throwing himself up from the relative safety of his current position, the brown proto-dragon managed another exhalation. The column caught the top of Galakrond's browridge, causing him to look down instinctively as he had before. As he did that, Alexstrasza and Ysera increased their own assault, now alternating so that as he raised his head again, Galakrond remained concerned only with them. But just as it seemed things were at last coming together, Neltharion roared, "Not-living!" Twisting his neck hard, Malygos discovered some of the undead almost nipping at their tails. The creatures did not fly with the relative coordination that they'd first had, which to both Kalec and his host revealed that Galakrond had completely released his hold on them. Whether he had done so intentionally or simply because he had become too distracted to maintain any link could not be said. What did matter was that the animated corpses had returned to whatever passed for their instinct and were flying after the closest potential meals. And with Malygos and Neltharion carrying a heavy burden between them, the two males looked like very easy meals. "Neltharion-is-strong!" Malygos roared, a desperate addition to the plan hatching. "Neltharion could carry this stone by himself!" The charcoal-gray proto-dragon's eyes narrowed. "Neltharion is strong. So- is Malygos-and smarter than Neltharion." Neltharion opened one paw. The rock shifted. Without thinking, Malygos tightened his own grip. He knew what Neltharion intended-it was what he himself had been about to do-but it was already too late to stop the other proto-dragon.
Neltharion released his remaining hold. Malygos grunted from effort as he fought to keep the rock from slipping free. Kalec knew that Malygos had intended to ask Neltharion to carry the rock while the icy-blue male went back to face the undead. It was not that Malygos thought fighting Galakrond's puppets was easier; in some ways, it merely offered a more immediate and just as grisly death. But Neltharion knew what Kalec also knew about Malygos. For the plan against Galakrond to succeed, Malygos had to coordinate it. Neltharion was a fearsome fighter, the strongest of the five, but he was not the planner Malygos was. At least not yet, Kalec abruptly recalled. As Deathwing, Neltharion proved far too cunning. But that's in the future . . . I think. As Kalec battled with himself over whether or not there was a future, Malygos took one last glance at Neltharion, who at that moment barreled into three of the encroaching undead. Then, steeling himself, Malygos faced Galakrond. Inhaling deeply, Kalec's host pushed harder. He could not prevent Neltharion's likely death, but he could help make that sacrifice count . . . even if he and the others also had to sacrifice themselves to do that. And as Malygos closed on the deformed leviathan, he felt very certain that they would have to. Galakrond chose that moment to twist to the side. He snapped at Ysera, the huge fangs coming within a few feet of her. She backed up as quickly as she could, but Galakrond continued to pursue her, his jaws again opening. Fire scorched near his eye. Alexstrasza exhaled twice, attempting to draw his attention to her. However, Galakrond ignored the minor pain she caused. To Malygos's shock and probably that of everyone else, including Galakrond, Ysera reversed direction. She flew into the opening maw, then immediately rose, her hind paws pulled forward and her own jaws open. Her mad actions served to make Alexstrasza continue to exhale, even though she fought for breath each time. The flames rained over the entire side of Galakrond's scaled countenance. Extraneous limbs twisted, sizzled, and withered under the onslaught, so much so that it did cause Galakrond to roar in pain.
As his mouth then widened, Ysera scraped her claws across the blackened flesh inside the top. Blood and pus poured forth from the sorely wounded area. Ignoring the fluids spilling over her, the yellowish female took a savage bite from the same flesh before turning away. Galakrond's roar trebled. He snapped shut his jaws, but by then, the impetuous Ysera had just made her escape. Seeing Galakrond clamp his jaws, Malygos feared for his own plan, but then his gargantuan foe opened his mouth wide once more. Galakrond hacked and coughed-and for a moment looked slightly smaller. He is weakened, Malygos thought. Not for long, but he is weakened. Kalec knew most of Malygos's plan by this time, but that knowledge did not encourage him. Nor did it encourage him to have his host flying as fast as he could with such a tremendous burden into the very maw from which Ysera had just barely escaped. Galakrond sniffed the air. He turned toward Malygos. Nozdormu blasted the nearer eye with sand. Neither Malygos nor the monster had seen Nozdormu closing, the brown proto-dragon timing his attacks perfectly, as usual. Galakrond tilted his head away from the irritating sand, which gave Malygos the opening he needed. The icy-blue male flew under the upper fangs and into a place that stank not only from the ravaged flesh but also from the breath of the ultimate carnivore to stride across the young world. Both Malygos and Kalec tried not to think of just how many proto-dragons had gone down that much-too-close gullet. Malygos's grip slipped. His exertions had finally taken their toll. He felt the rock almost fall free. Struggling to keep what grasp he had, Malygos pushed on toward the frightening gap. All Galakrond had to do was shut his mouth and swallow, and that would be the end of the tinier proto-dragon. Now! Kalec silently shouted at his host. Now! But Malygos kept on a second longer. He sought just the right angle. Darkness enveloped Kalec, but this time, it was the darkness of Galakrond's jaws closing. Releasing his hold, Malygos banked. Neither could see the rock's descent, but they knew the results of it in the next breath. Galakrond's jaws shot open yet again, and new hacking almost
deafened Kalec and his host. Taking the chance that he might be bitten in two just like Talonixa, Malygos darted out the side. However, it appeared that he need not have feared being bitten, for Galakrond continued to cough, this time for another reason. As Malygos had planned and hoped, the rock he had chosen, a large, pointed projectile, had slid down deep into the behemoth's throat. There it lodged, cutting off most of Galakrond's breathing. The enormous proto-dragon thrashed in the sky. His tail shattered part of a mountainside. One hind paw kicked tons of stone from another. Still unable to dislodge the rock, Galakrond collided with a mountain. Rather than flying into the air again, he swiftly crawled over it. His claws and tail left devastation in their wake. Leaning over a valley, Galakrond lowered his head. He shook it back and forth hard. He will free himself! Malygos had hoped that the rock would remain lodged enough at least to make their adversary collapse, preferably die. Now he worried that Galakrond still had a very good chance of freeing his air passage. If that happened, Malygos doubted he would get the opportunity to try a second time. Malygos sought out Nozdormu and the sisters, roaring for their attention. With his head, he indicated Galakrond. As weary as they all were, they had to move in close yet again and do what they could to keep the rock lodged. Despite the urgency, Malygos looked back for Neltharion. There was no sign of either the charcoal-gray proto-dragon or his horrific opponents. Malygos hissed, imagining the undead feeding on Neltharion's torn body with such vividness that Kalec could also see it. The hiss grew more angry, more determined. Taking in Galakrond, Malygos thought of not only Neltharion's death but also those of the monster's previous victims. He dived. The grotesque leviathan's sides heaved rapidly. It seemed impossible to Kalec's host that Galakrond could breathe at all, but some air had to be writhing its way down the throat. Not enough to satisfy Galakrond's needs but enough to keep him a viable threat.
The four of them swarmed the head, each coming in from a different direction. Galakrond kept his head down. His body quivered. Malygos heard a change in the breathing. It was not quite so rapid. If the stone was still stuck, it had at least shifted, giving Galakrond more air. Too late, Kalec's host realized that their monstrous foe had to be more aware of what was happening around him than he was before. As if hearing that thought, Galakrond gazed skyward. He took in the four tiny figures. "Lit-little morsels!" Galakrond somehow managed. "I will-will eat you when I can!" He coughed violently, but at the same time, his wings flapped wildly-not to fly but to purposely keep his enemies away. The wings did that to Ysera and Alexstrasza but not to Malygos and Nozdormu. Nozdormu seized hold of one webbed wing and, perhaps too out of breath to exhale at the head, ran his claws over the wing's membrane. The claws cut deep, proving that there were some parts of Galakrond's skin that were not impervious. Galakrond's coughing ceased. He angrily snapped at Nozdormu, giving Malygos the opening he desired. The only hope remaining was keeping Galakrond's airway from clearing. Malygos knew he could have ensured that earlier. Instead, he had let his natural survival instincts take over. He had fled the behemoth's jaws rather than doing what must be done. The rock could never be dislodged if another large object kept it wedged in tighter. Malygos intended to be that wedge, although doing so might well promise his destruction along with that of Galakrond, considering the great height from which they would plummet. Kalec, too, understood the need for the sacrifice and welcomed it. He still had slight memories-or imaginings-of some life beyond that as an unnoticed portion of Malygos, but those only pained him, for they hinted at someone lost to the blue dragon, someone fading farther away. Let us die saving this world, he told Malygos, even though his words continued to be unheeded. Let us die. . . . Rising on his hind legs, Galakrond set one smaller forepaw against the nearest peak. Even the forepaw had the strength to crush rock and packed dirt as if they were loose sand. The wings continued to flap, yet not only did
Nozdormu cut deeper ribbons in the one, but Alexstrasza and Ysera also attempted to do the same with the other. The attacks by the three probably would have been insignificant if Galakrond had been able to breathe properly, but as it was, they further disoriented the half-suffocating beast. But then an unsettling gurgling noise escaped Galakrond. It was followed by a raspy breath that extended several seconds too long for Malygos's comfort. That Galakrond could breathe so well could only mean that he had the rock nearly dislodged. More than ever, Malygos saw the need for his choice. The others were doing as originally planned, keeping their gigantic foe distracted for the critical blow. They just did not realize exactly how their chosen leader had decided to make that final assault. The jaws were open just wide enough. Malygos took a fleeting measure of the gap and thought that Galakrond appeared to have slightly shrunken again. The behemoth's growth and transformation had become more chaotic, likely because of the diet that had perverted his shape in the first place. Malygos tightened his approach. Pushing his momentum as hard as he could, he folded his wings against his body and darted inside. Galakrond's fetid breath enveloped him, and hints of the foul mist threatened to dull Malygos's mind before he could commit himself. He saw the rock, now halfway out and leaning to one side. Galakrond tried to shift it with the back of his tongue, creating more complications for the much smaller proto-dragon. The icy-blue male collided with the stone, shoving it deeper. That, though, caused an instantaneous reaction from Galakrond, who shook his head with greater violence and tried to exhale. Undeterred, Malygos dug into the back of the behemoth's tongue and shoved against the stone, sending it as far in as he could. A sudden tremor shook Malygos, but it was nothing that Galakrond had done. Something had struck Galakrond hard in the skull, with such force that the head still reverberated. Malygos saw that working to his advantage. With his monstrous opponent so otherwise occupied, Kalec's host exhaled at the area around the stone. The harsh frost sealed the stone in place, at least for the moment. Both Malygos and Kalec knew that the heat generated by Galakrond would quickly
overwhelm the frost. Malygos had merely wanted to give himself time to adjust his position. Seeking air yet again, Galakrond opened his mouth wider. Malygos eyed the opening, the temptation to fly out of the beast a very reasonable one. Still, he knew that he had to stay. A whirling form barreled into Galakrond's mouth. It quickly proved to be not one thing but, rather, two. One of those things was a battered and ravaged undead, which at first made Kalec and his host fear that Galakrond had come up with the startling plan of sending his puppets in to do what he himself could not. Yet while the potential for that only now occurred to them, it was not the case, for the second object was clearly very much alive. Battered and bruised, scratched but not showing any signs of having been bitten, Neltharion bared his teeth in a grin at the sight of Malygos. "Fly! Fly away!" the charcoal-gray male insisted. Malygos peered at his own handiwork. The frost was already melting. A sudden dip nearly sent them tumbling into the jagged teeth and also showed much jostling by the rock. "Must stay!" he shouted back. "You go!" "All fight together! One family!" Neltharion glared at the rock as he swatted the still-struggling corpse. "I will keep it in! You go!" But Malygos instead leapt at Neltharion-or, rather, the ripped and torn undead. He seized the flailing body by the throat, twisting the neck so that the claws and the teeth could not threaten him. Galakrond shook back and forth. Malygos and Neltharion had just enough room to flutter up into the air, keeping them from being affected very much. Malygos launched himself toward the rock again, carrying the animated corpse with him. The rock began to slide. The upper part of the mouth suddenly loomed in Malygos's path as Galakrond dipped his head down to aid his breathing. Kalec's host corrected. The undead struggled to free itself. Malygos shook his foul catch hard, then sent it tumbling forward.
The ghoulish creature collided with the rock, shoving it slightly deeper. But that was not Malygos's full intention. He bent his hind legs forward, ready to push as hard as he could. "Move!" Malygos veered off just in time. Neltharion, hind paws bent forward in the same manner as his friend, crashed against both the undead and the stone. With a force that Malygos could not have possibly mustered, Neltharion jammed the bony figure and the rock deep into Galakrond's gullet. Teeth slammed against Malygos as Galakrond reacted. A muffled roar still almost deafened him. Neltharion, seeking to avoid the rippling tongue, collided with Kalec's host. Malygos hurtled out the side of the mouth. Neltharion! He's still inside! It was impossible to say whether the thought first originated from Malygos or Kalec, but the blue dragon found himself astounded that he, who could yet recall some bits of his supposed future, would want to rescue a creature who would, in turn, threaten Azeroth. Yet when Malygos immediately arced back, Kalec cheered him on. Neltharion lay sprawled on his back, trying to right himself despite the mad swinging of Galakrond's head and the writhing tongue. If not for the fact that the passage was blocked, Neltharion would have been swallowed twice. Galakrond's jaws snapped shut. Malygos feared for his companion, but the mouth opened again. Neltharion had managed to turn onto his stomach, but he had still not regained his balance. Dodging teeth larger than him, Malygos soared back inside. Hind paws ready, he seized Neltharion by the shoulders and pushed on without hesitation. Neltharion went limp in his grip, but only to keep from distracting Malygos. The jaws started to close again. With another beat of his wings, Malygos pulled himself tightly together. The two proto-dragons returned to the outside just as the jaws shut. Neltharion stirred to life, and Malygos, barely able to hold on, let him go. The two exhausted males did not go far, instead banking together and returning to the aid of their comrades. But both pulled up short at the sight before them. Alexstrasza, Ysera, and Nozdormu no longer sought to keep Galakrond occupied. It did not just have to
do with the fact that Malygos and Neltharion were no longer in danger; simply staying near Galakrond was to invite doom. The gargantuan proto-dragon thrashed wildly, ravaging the nearby mountains and sending one avalanche after another down on the areas below. His tail and wings flailed through the air, striking other mountainsides and creating a wind that buffeted the smaller proto-dragons even as far away as where they were. Galakrond's hacking and choking reached epic proportions. To the shock of Kalec and his host, Galakrond struck his head against one peak in what was evidently a more desperate attempt to dislodge the rock. Malygos feared that he would succeed, but all that happened was that Galakrond shook his head again as if to clear it. As he did that, his furious gaze fell upon Malygos. Galakrond rose into the air, the icy-blue male his target. Malygos had no choice but to turn and flee. And hope. Yet barely had he done so when a tremendous thud made him look back. Rather than pursuing Malygos, Galakrond had abruptly banked to the south. He crashed into the top of a mountain and tumbled over it. Malygos considered continuing his flight, but Galakrond's next action put an end to such thoughts. Galakrond managed to rise into the air, but his path turned more erratic. Twice he dropped on top of peaks, destroying their crowns, before he succeeded in staying aloft. Yet it seemed as if Galakrond no longer even noticed Malygos and the others. He moved on to the south, past the mountains to the bleak stretches beyond, as if some key to his struggle for breath could be found there. Fearful that such might be the case, Malygos finally dared to pursue the behemoth. Neltharion and the rest joined him. They all knew that if Galakrond was free to breathe, their own deaths would very likely soon follow. Galakrond fluttered over the wasteland, his path meandering. His body was aglow again, but now as if aflame. Several of the extraneous appendages shriveled. From a distance, Galakrond almost looked like a true proto-dragon once more, albeit a huge one. And then he simply dropped.
The land below shook with his collision, the shock wave expanding for miles. Crevasses spread all around where Galakrond hit, cracks that looked like lightning bolts coursing along the ground. No sooner had he hit than Galakrond shoved skyward once more. He managed to rise as high as one of the lower mountains in the distance, then fell again. While his crash did not reverberate as much as the last one had, it was no less dramatic, for it was quickly followed by the leviathan's manic flailing on the ground. All the while, Galakrond coughed and hacked. His eyes stared but no longer appeared to see. He pushed himself up, beating his wings harder. Somehow Galakrond managed to keep going until, at last, he hovered higher than ever- His wings ceased flapping. The coughing also stopped, but only because Galakrond was no longer trying to breathe. To Kalec and his host, it appeared that Galakrond remained frozen in the air. The gigantic proto-dragon hung before them, wings spread to their full length. The illusion faded as Galakrond dropped like a stone, his massive body spiraling tail-first. When he struck this time, the force threw up a cloud of snow and dust that briefly obscured everything. Malygos managed to make out the silhouette as Galakrond's head swung down after the rest of his body had hit. The great head smashed into the empty landscape so forcefully that the neck snapped and the skull tilted at an odd angle, at which point the lower jawbone also broke off. And only then, only as the dust cleared enough for the five to see and when it no longer mattered for Galakrond, the rock and the grisly remains tumbled free through the ruined jaws. They came to rest several yards away, insignificant in size compared with the creature they had helped bring down. Galakrond was dead.
FIVE PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE
Jaina understood. She knew why the artifact had been created, and she knew why it was acting as it was. She also knew that it threatened to take Kalec from her. However, now the archmage had the key to reaching him. Jaina only prayed she still had time. •   •   • They hovered there at first, unable to believe what they saw. It was Neltharion who finally did the unthinkable, testing whether Galakrond was dead by landing right on top of the heavy torso. Neltharion hit hard enough that the body trembled . . . but Galakrond did not stir. Malygos landed before the huge head, marveling at what they had wrought. In retrospect, he knew that he had not expected that they would live, much less triumph. The immensity of their victory only now registered with him, and the proto-dragon shook. Alexstrasza and her sister joined him. Nozdormu circled the great corpse once, then descended. Neltharion abandoned his perch atop the torso to fly next to the brown proto-dragon as they headed toward the other three. Neltharion dropped next to Malygos. "We have won! We are powerful!" "We are lucky," Malygos murmured in turn. The charcoal-gray male cocked his head, then nodded. "Lucky, too . . . yes." But this was more than luck, just as Neltharion indicated, an increasingly disjointed Kalec decided. We won because we fought as one. He no longer thought of himself as ever having been a separate entity born in a time long after this. Kalec knew that he had always been a hidden part of Malygos. He assumed the other proto-dragons had similar secondary personalities, but that point was not very important to him. What mattered was that he and Malygos-along with the others-had managed to bring down Galakrond. The world was safe.
"He was right. . . . He insisted he was right," a feminine voice declared from behind them. "We should've listened better," agreed a masculine one that sounded to Malygos and Kalec like none other than Tyr. As one, the proto-dragons whirled around. Teeth and claws readied for the possibility of attack. But instead, they confronted two cloaked and hooded forms with shadowed faces. One stood as tall and as broad as Tyr had when he and Kalec's host had first met; the other was slightly shorter and slimmer. Malygos judged the smaller to be the female and was proved correct when the figure spoke again. "Hail to you, victors. We and this world owe you a debt." "Where is Tyr?" Malygos asked impatiently. "You took him?" "We did take him," the male responded. "His injury would have proved fatal otherwise. He's well but not recovered." The more the male talked, the more Malygos noted something familiar. "Heard you in my head! You told us the way through mountains!" "There were things you needed to know, such as Galakrond devouring both the undead and the living. We also sought to give you a few moments' necessary respite." But Malygos was still not satisfied. Aware now that Tyr's kind had been observing and acting surreptitiously, he needed to know one other thing. "Tyr fought! Tyr fought and almost died! You could have fought! You could have won!" "Power does not mean victory," the female answered solemnly. "We might have won, or, more likely, we would have made things worse. Tyr had a point there, too, when last he tried to urge us to a course of action. We were beyond caring, though, indifferent to everything once our suggestions to him were found to be without merit." "We let our duty in this world slip away," her companion continued bluntly. "We were unfit to protect it . . . unlike you." For the first time, he moved, raising a hand identical to Tyr's toward Malygos and the other four. "Tyr was correct in many things but most of all in this. He was right in what he found in the five of you. He asked of us-no, properly demanded of us-to set matters
right so that no Galakrond, no other threat, may ever bring Azeroth to extinction." The five proto-dragons glanced at one another, not understanding at all what the two-legged creatures meant. Kalec had some glimmer of the truth, but the haze that had gradually been enveloping him made those thoughts fade again. "Guardians are needed, guardians representing the five essential Aspects that have helped mold this world and will continue to," the female started. Now she, too, raised a hand toward Malygos and the rest. "You will literally be those Aspects, using them in whatever manner necessary." "Stronger." Malygos finally comprehended. "You want to make us stronger." "More than just that. You will be something different, something grander." For the first time, the female hesitated. "But only if you choose to take on the roles of protectors. Tyr was also adamant about that. You chose to fight for your world once; will you now make it the purpose of your existence?" The words were big ones, but Malygos found he understood better than he would have expected. There was much he grasped that even a season ago he would have believed impossible to decipher. And in understanding that, his decision was easy. "I will do this." He looked to his companions. Alexstrasza was already nodding her agreement. Ysera was not far behind. Nozdormu appeared to mull over the offer for a moment and then, with a hiss, added his nod. Only Neltharion had not answered yet. Indeed, Malygos found his friend staring off toward the mountains, as if he were listening to something. Malygos let out a low, short hiss that brought Neltharion's attention back to the gathering. With what seemed almost impatience, the charcoal-gray protodragon blurted, "Yes . . . yesss." "Then we shall begin now," the male announced to the proto-dragons and to the air itself. And all at once, Kalec stirred from his fog. He realized what was about to take place. The female figure-who, like her partner and Tyr, radiated a presence much more astounding than what could at the moment be visibly seen -had even used the keyword. "Aspects," she said, Kalec recalled. This is how Malygos and the others became the Aspects!
The actual event had been enshrouded in mystery even for the other dragons. Kalec suddenly remembered that, when he was much younger, he had sometimes wondered how the five had come to be the world's defenders. And with those memories returned others, so many others. Kalec knew again who he had been and what had happened that had drawn him into these visions- "Kalec." He jolted. No . . . Malygos jolted. Kalec shook his head, Malygos's head. For the first time, Kalec had control. "Kalec, look at me." "Jaina?" He gasped, turning. "Jaina-" But it was not Jaina he faced. Rather, Alexstrasza looked intently at him. "Kalec," the fire-orange proto-dragon murmured. "Look at me." Near them, two more hooded figures materialized. Kalec found himself caught between wanting to see what was happening and wanting to finally escape to his own existence. He wanted his life more than he had in many months, whether or not he was no longer an Aspect. "Concentrate, Kalec. The artifact is trying to do what Tyr tasked it with, but the foulness that was Galakrond tainted it over the millennia, distorting its function even as it still sought to serve Tyr and the Aspects." Kalec tried to seize on her words, but at the same time, the newcomers raised their hands. He also suddenly sensed that there was another, greater presence acting through the keepers, that presence being the true force bringing about the proto-dragons' coming transformations. The titans. It is happening! the blue dragon thought. The titans are the ones overseeing the transformation, the creation of the Aspects! As they raised their hands, the figures also changed. They began to grow. Their hoods and cloaks fell away, revealing four giants akin in appearance to Tyr when he had fought Galakrond. The keepers continued to swell in size, and their bodies glowed with tremendous power. "Kalec!" Alexstrasza called more sharply. "Look at me!" Only she could have drawn him from this moment. Kalec at last concentrated fully on Alexstrasza, seeing in those reptilian eyes human ones.
The world began to turn on its head. Everything except the eyes into which Kalec stared now appeared as if he were looking through water. Kalec felt his bond with Malygos fade and, with it, the grip the visions had on him. Darkness enveloped the blue dragon. Only the eyes, Jaina's eyes, brought any illumination. Kalec held her gaze because he understood that to lose that hold would mean his doom-and also because those eyes were hers. With a gasp, Kalec at last truly woke up. He felt the floor beneath him. He detected the scents of the Nexus-the traces of generations of blue dragons and the inherent smells that he associated with so much magic. But most important, he saw not only the eyes of Jaina Proudmoore but also her face. Her human scent, so unique among her own kind and so enticing to him, lingered in his nostrils. Kalec tried to speak, to say her name, but it came out as a croak. "Hush," Jaina murmured, her hand gently touching his cheek. "Hush . . . give it a second." He was too impatient, though. "J-Jaina . . . you brought . . . you brought me back." "Nothing will take you away from me. Ever." Her tone was blunt. He knew she meant what she said, and he felt the same. Reaching up a hand-a hand without scales or claws-Kalec touched her cheek in turn. Then he recalled the bane of his existence. He looked to the side and saw that despite what he would have assumed, Jaina had not destroyed the artifact. It sat nearby, its glow very slight but still there. With an angry hiss, Kalec started a spell- "No, Kalec." Using both hands, the archmage brought his eyes back to her own. "The artifact means no harm. Remember what I said to you in the vision?" "You said . . ." He did not go on, instead asking, "How do you know?" "I was given the key, I think by a keeper. Or maybe a part of the relic with its own purpose. I'm not certain. I only know that she wasn't a taunka." "Buniq?" Neither possibility concerning the taunka surprised him.
She summoned a flagon of wine from the air, then gently set the edge to his lips. While he sipped, Jaina explained further. "Tyr-the artifact made all this clear-always planned ahead. His only mistake was not foreseeing what Galakrond would become, as if anyone could have! He tried to make up for it by finding those champions who not only could defeat Galakrond but would also be willing to sacrifice themselves and their lives forever for the sake of Azeroth." "He found them. He found the five," Kalec whispered. "Malygos. Alexstrasza. Ysera. Nozdormu. Nelth-Neltharion. They were heroes even before they were the Aspects. Azeroth wouldn't have reached the time of the dragons without their willingness to do what they had to do." "They saved the world without all the powers they gained as the Aspects." She paused, her eyes widening. "Kalec! Did you see it?" "No . . . and I don't think I would have. I think the vision was almost finished. I think I might have returned to the beginning, living it over and over and over." Kalec imagined the last few moments. "The artifact. Tyr tied it to the five. That's what he was doing when he pointed it at us-them. Imprinting the five on it. I think it drew from each but especially from Malygos, the first. Tyr didn't know that it would end up inside Galakrond." "The key enabled me to delve into its core," the archmage said. "I saw some of what he intended it to tell you about its function. Tyr suspected-or knew- that someday there would come a time when the five would have great doubts about themselves, when they might believe they were no longer worthy of their roles as protectors." This was sounding all too familiar to Kalec. "At Wyrmrest, it came to a head. That's when they decided just that, because they no longer had the powers of the Aspects. They'd grown too accustomed to depending on those." He frowned. "And that's when the artifact awoke. It sensed that what Tyr feared had happened, if not quite as he calculated, and tried to act as he wanted. The only problems were the great amount of time and Galakrond's taint infiltrating its magical matrix." Kalec tried to stand. With Jaina's arm around him, he finally managed. On somewhat unsteady legs, he walked to the relic. It no longer disturbed him, now that he knew what it had been meant for.
Tyr wanted them to be reminded of what they once were and how much they had accomplished even then. To Jaina's shock, Kalec picked up the artifact. "What are you planning to do with that?" He thought of all he had lived through in the visions and what he had seen of young Malygos and the other four. There was only one course he could take after that. "I'm going to call a convocation." •   •   • He waited quietly in the chamber, hoping that he was not waiting in vain. He had arrived at Wyrmrest more than four hours earlier, wanting to reach it before the others. Kalec still sensed nothing beyond the temple's walls. The others should have been there by now. It was already well past the hour on which they had all agreed. With a grimace, Kalec recalled how, in truth, the three had only said that they would fly to Wyrmrest after he had pestered them over and over. It would not surprise him if they had changed their minds. For the moment, he remained in his humanoid form, preferring it now for a variety of reasons. One was that he could better handle the artifact as he desired. The relic currently sat in the very center of the chamber, a few feet ahead of Kalec on the platform. It pulsated quietly, its functioning having been corrected by Kalec and Jaina. Galakrond's taint had also been expunged, at least as far as either could tell. If they do not come, I will have to bring it to each of them. Even that might not solve the situation; the other three could very well refuse to see him. "Well, Kalec. Can you tell us now for what reason you insisted we return here?" He could not help jumping. Alexstrasza-her form humanoid-strode into the chamber, looking every bit as radiant as when he had seen her in the forest. There was no sign of Ysera or Nozdormu, but Kalec suddenly sensed their nearby presence. "You've been here for a while," he muttered.
"We needed to . . . discuss some things first. Now we are ready to hear you, if you still wish to call this gathering." In response, Kalec took a few steps back from his position and transformed into his draconic form. He peered down at Alexstrasza. "I do." "Very well." She started toward her usual place, changing as she moved. By the time Alexstrasza halted, she, too, was no longer humanoid in appearance. Barely had she finished changing when Nozdormu and Ysera also entered. Unlike Alexstrasza, they did so in their draconic shapes and not in humanoid ones. They said nothing as they positioned themselves. "Thank you for doing this," the blue dragon quietly said. "Just what are we doing?" Ysera interrupted. "Best tell us quickly. You said it had to do with that thing, which I know I have seen somewhere before-" Kalec immediately concentrated on the relic. Nozdormu hissed. "Jussst what are you-" Tyr's creation glowed brightly. The three other dragons' gazes became locked on the relic. Kalec let out a deep breath. As it had done with him, so the artifact now did with the others, only in not so haphazard a way. All relived their past, from their first meeting with one another to the epic struggle. But whereas Kalec had been caught up in the vision for days, the three others were only entranced for a minute, maybe two. In that short time, though, their reptilian countenances displayed a series of emotions, none of which, unfortunately, told Kalec how they were taking this sudden journey. The artifact's glow all but faded. As Kalec expected, Alexstrasza and the others stirred. "I was . . ." Ysera hesitated. Nozdormu stared at the relic. "That thing . . ." Alexstrasza looked put out. "Kalecgos, you should not have done this without our permission!" "Would you have given it?" "Of course not!" Ysera snapped. Then, sounding surprisingly softer, Alexstrasza's sister added, "But we would have been wrong." Nozdormu turned his baleful gaze from Tyr's creation to Kalec. "Explain thisss . . . and yourself."
Kalec did, telling them what he had gone through and the things he had experienced in the vision. He told them everything except Jaina's part in it, as she had requested. And when he was done, even Nozdormu looked astounded. "I wondered for some time after why he had brought forth that thing," the former Aspect of Time muttered. "What a foolish notion to think that he could change what has happened by reminding us of this incident." "It was hardly just an incident, though," the red dragon pointed out to him. "And your own tone betrays you, Nozdormu. You lived it again, just as my sister and I did. You remember how you felt then. How we all felt." "What does that matter?" Ysera blurted. Kalec seized control again. "What matters is what Tyr wanted you to see. What you have to see. When we gave up our powers to save Azeroth, you three, who'd wielded them for so long, willingly did a great and noble thing. Throughout the millennia, as Aspects, you more than once proved yourselves willing to sacrifice your lives." He looked at each of them, daring someone to deny what he said. "But Tyr knew-and I understand-that you were granted such fantastic powers in the first place not just because you were there but because you had already proved yourselves worthy several times over. Proved yourselves worthy as proto-dragons, nothing more." Nozdormu grunted. "We nearly died several times over." "But you did not." "No . . . we did." Alexstrasza exhaled. "Not literally, but we did die. We forgot what we once were. How we originally were. We did exist before we became Aspects." She set herself before Ysera and Nozdormu. "We existed, and we fought thinking not of ourselves but of everything!" Kalec pulled back again. Alexstrasza understood, but did the others? "You fought very well for a runt," Nozdormu remarked to Ysera. "I thought you mad at timesss . . . but admirable." "I had her to keep up with," Alexstrasza's sibling replied with a nod toward the crimson dragon. "And you were always there to lend your strength at the right moment, Nozdormu. You know that." "We all fought very well that day," Alexstrasza agreed. "Even . . . even Malygos and Neltharion."
The three were silent for several seconds; then, as one, they turned to face the youngest of their party. Kalec remained perfectly still, aware that anything could alter the moment. Alexstrasza shook her head. "You should never have done this, Kalec." "It was ill-advised," Nozdormu added. "Risky," Ysera concluded. "But it has reminded us of much," her sister went on. "Reminded us most of all of who we were and still are." Alexstrasza again glanced at the other two. "We have far more to think about. Would you not agree?" "Much," the bronze dragon answered. Ysera nodded. Something that had been bothering Kalec finally demanded attention. "I have to ask one thing. We all know Galakrond as Father of Dragons, but . . ." "It did not begin that way," Alexstrasza murmured. "The first dragons to come after us knew only of the great skeleton already long lying in the Dragonblight. We made certain that the truth about Galakrond would remain secret, for fear that some other might decide to follow his insidious path. Because of his immense size, many could not fathom him as anything else but a true dragon." "We chose to encourage the misunderstanding," Nozdormu interjected. "And in his perverse way, Galakrond did cause the rise of dragonsss. A 'father' in some sense, if not exactly as we led all othersss to believe." "And we shall continue to leave it that way," the red dragon quietly declared. Then, before a startled Kalec could react, Alexstrasza turned and scooped up the artifact. "I will tend to this. Its work-Tyr's work-is done. We may not be Aspects anymore, but we are still ourselves. I, for one, think that perhaps there is some more I can offer the world after all. We can only wait and see." "I understand," Kalec finally dared reply. "The next convocation had better be for more urgent mattersss," Nozdormu commented as he spread his wings and started from the platform. "Promise that." "I-promise." "You're a stubborn one," Ysera murmured as she followed Nozdormu. "I can appreciate that."
Kalec was left with Alexstrasza. She tightened her grip on the relic. "Should I ever find that Tyr lives, I will thank him for reminding us. As I do not know if I will have that chance, I thank you in his place, Kalec." "There's no need-" "Yes, there is. You still remembered life before assuming the mantle. You remembered enough to make certain that Tyr's hopes rekindled our own drive. So I thank you for that and much else." She left the dais but, before reaching the exit, briefly turned back. "Oh . . . and thank her for us also." Alexstrasza departed before Kalec could regain his composure. He immediately whirled toward a distant column half in the shadows. "You heard her?" A part of the column separated from the bulk. As it did, it became Jaina Proudmoore. "I shouldn't have come with you! I'm sorry! What will she do?" He shrugged. "Nothing. Maybe find a way to thank you again. I should have known that she, of all three, might sense you." He shrank down into his humanoid form. Unperturbed by what she had just witnessed, Jaina gladly fell into his arms. For several seconds, they did not speak. Then Jaina said, "Did it work, Kalec? Will they rejoin the world? Azeroth needs them!" Azeroth needs them. Three simple words, but Kalec thought about how much those words covered. The three elder dragons carried among them such knowledge, such experience, courage, and wisdom alone, that to lose even those things would leave the world sorely lacking. That, Kalec knew, could not be allowed to happen. "I think they will," he finally answered. "They've always been true to themselves. They'll see the truth more than ever now. They just . . . forgot for a while." Without warning, she kissed him. He replied in kind. When they separated, Jaina whispered, "I'm so very proud of you, Kalec." "I don't know why-" "There are many reasons. Most of all, for not forgetting yourself, either. You still have a role in this world, too. Several, in fact, I'd say."
They had discussed some of this while he had been preparing for the convocation. After living through the visions, Kalec was now reconsidering his decision to let the other blue dragons choose their individual paths. He still had much to mull over and might yet decide to keep matters as they were, but there were factors favoring restoring the blue dragonflight. Not only for the sake of Azeroth but for the sake of his own kind. He had shirked his duties just as the others had done, but he would make up for that now. And there were other roles. Roles that he had yet to completely figure out except that Jaina insisted she would be there to assist him. Their powers combined would be potent enough, but both believed that their hearts combined might in some ways help guide Azeroth yet more for the better. Kalec thought it would be interesting to find out. "We should leave," he told Jaina. She nodded, then stepped back. As she did, Kalec transformed again. He lowered one wing so that she could climb up. "Are you ready?" Kalec asked. "Yes." The blue dragon wended his way out of the temple. Night was just beginning to fall, allowing some details in the distance still to be noticed in the gloom. Kalec spread his wings and leapt into the air. He looked back to make certain that Jaina was safe, then ascended higher. On a whim, Kalec circled Wyrmrest once. As he did, out of the corner of his eye, the blue dragon beheld the bones of Galakrond. A brief glint made him look closer. "What is it?" Jaina called. "Nothing . . . nothing." Kalec banked, for Jaina's sake heading toward Dalaran before he returned to the Nexus to ascertain whether there were any lingering aftereffects from the artifact's presence. There was no reason he could not have told Jaina what he thought he'd seen below except that it had probably been his imagination. She might have understood, but this was one secret he decided to keep from her. In the growing shadows of the great ribs, Kalec thought he had seen a figure, a figure small and cloaked but at the same time seeming as tall and as powerful
as a dragon. And whether the image of Tyr had been real for that brief time or, most likely, conjured by his mind, Kalec silently thanked the keeper for Alexstrasza, Ysera, Nozdormu . . . and himself.
NORTHREND
Twin rows of straining, green-skinned warriors tugged on taut, broad ropes as they dragged a colossal wheeled cage slowly up the wide ramp leading into the last of the ships. Despite Northrend's eternal winter, the muscular orcs sweated heavily from effort. Their broad-jawed faces contorted with each new heave of the ropes. Guards stood alongside the ramp, torches in one hand, ready weapons in the other. With steely brown eyes they watched not the workers but rather the great covered cage. The cube-shaped structure towered over them, its outer covering consisting of a great tarp sewn from goatskin. There were no gaps in the tarp, no hint from the container as to just what the cargo was. But there was a clue, revealed simply in the fact that the orcs themselves maneuvered the cargo. Desolate as the port was, it did have work animals such as the horned, reptilian kodo beasts, strong creatures more than capable of taking the places of the struggling orcs. There was even a trio of mammoths, generally used for transporting several riders at once. Yet, not only were those animals excluded from the effort, but they had been moved decidedly far from the vicinity of the docks. Even there, they stirred anxiously, the kodo beasts flaring their nostrils and the mammoths waving their trunks as all the animals stared in the direction of the ships. With a tremendous howl, the winds abruptly picked up to storm strength. Weather in Northrend had only one consistent factor . . . that it was foul. But there were many levels of foul, and the docks shook as the waters of the cold sea suddenly churned with great waves. Ship hulls groaned as every vessel rocked hard.
From deep within some of the ships, there came horrendous roars and banging. On deck, crewmembers rushed to the hatches leading down to the holds. Stern veteran mariners and warriors looked anxious. The last ship also rocked . . . and the gangplank twisted. It dipped to one side, spilling several startled guards and throwing the workers into a tangle. The cage shifted. At the last moment, the orcs on the teetering ramp kept the container from falling. However, no sooner had they managed that than it began to shake from within. A roar identical to those emanating from the ships but much deeper echoed through the dank port. Something within began pulling at the tarp. Guards rushed up from the port. Those still astride the gangplank fought desperately to maintain their balance. One failed, instead tumbling into the chill waters between the dock and the ship. From the shoreline, the fleet captain-a one-eyed veteran mariner called Briln, whose body bore numerous intricate tattoos marking his journeys-raced toward the side of the gangplank and shouted, "Get that cage straightened! Don't let it fall! Get those weapons ready! Where's the powder? If that cage is damaged-" The cage beneath the tangled tarp rattled. The dim illumination of the windblown torches was insufficient to reveal what was happening, but the nervescraping wrenching of metal gave Briln enough warning. "Spears up front! Hurry, you offal! The right side of the cage!" Two guards either more impetuous or more foolish than the rest moved in closer. From his angle, Briln could not make out everything that happened next, but he saw enough. The foremost orc prodded the cage with his spear. The next instant, something snagged his weapon and tugged both it and him through a tear in the tarp. As that happened, the second orc instinctively lunged forward to aid his vanishing comrade. Something thick darted through the tear. The orc was too slow to realize his danger. He was plucked from the gangplank as if weighing nothing. Before his fellows could reach him, the massive appendage crushed the guard's torso-flesh, bone, plate armor, and all. The gore splattered those farther back.
The hand threw the limp, ruined body aside, then retreated into the covered cage. From within, there immediately came a cry from the first warrior, apparently left alive for the moment. Orcs with long, thick spears quickly lunged toward the spot as Briln raced up to join them. Two guards thrust, but the captain knew that it was already too late. Shrieks that almost stopped him in his tracks echoed through the Northrend port. The utter fear in those cries could be felt as well as heard. There was little that could shake an orc's resolve or even draw up in one anything resembling terror, but what had been captured at already so much cost was more than capable. A horrific crushing sound punctuated the shrieks. The orcs near the opening stepped back as something liquid sprayed them. A ghastly stench immediately followed, filling their noses. "Spears! Spears!" Briln roared again as he neared. The captain looked up. The torchlight enabled him to see the rip in the tarp and the bent bars. Those bars had been forged strong; even with all his might, the gargantuan beast had been unable to do more than pull the bars just a little farther apart. Unfortunately for the two guards, that had been quite sufficient. "Where's the powder?" Briln demanded to no one in particular. Another orc finally rushed up with a burlap sack the size of a thick fist. He also wore a coarse cloth over his mouth and nose and handed one just like it to Briln, who used the two strings attached to the piece to secure it to his own face. The mask was merely a precaution. Nothing from the sack should have ended up in either Briln's nose or mouth, but there was no sense in taking unnecessary chances. The captain was tempted to let the other orc do the task, but then he seized the sack himself. From within the nearby cage, sickening ripping sounds continued. "Cover me!" The captain positioned himself, then studied the gap carefully. Although he had lost the one eye years ago in battle in Kalimdor against the Alliance forces commanded by the human Admiral Proudmoore, Briln still prided himself on his expert aim. Taking a deep breath behind the cloth mask, the scarred orc tossed the pouch toward the gap.
The wind gusted, and for a moment Briln was filled with fear that the sack would miss entirely. However, it just barely made the edge of the rip, then fell into the obscured cage. A moment later the captain heard a small, soft thump. The beast within let out a distrusting rumble. There was the sound of chewing. A slight mist of powder exited the tear, but not enough to concern the orcs. The wind carried away what little escaped, dispersing it. Inside the covered cage, something heavy and moist dropped. Briln knew it to very likely be what was left of the guard. Despite that, the sound gave the captain more hope that his plan had succeeded. A confused grunt arose from the shrouded creature. Suddenly, the cage shook harder. Inside, a huge form slammed against the bent bars. Heavy breathing arose near the tear in the tarp, but nothing could be made out clearly in the tear itself. The breathing became labored, exhausted. The orcs heard stumbling. Then there came a violent thud. The cage shuddered and almost slipped again. Only the strength of nearly two dozen struggling orcs kept that from happening. Briln and the others waited several tense moments, but there was no renewed movement or sound. With caution, the captain approached the covered cage. Becoming more daring, he prodded the tarp. Nothing happened. Briln exhaled in relief, then turned to the others. "Load that thing aboard, then get those bars bent back and that hole covered with something! Better make sure that there's always a sack of that herb concoction the shaman gave us ready to sprinkle on the thing's food! We can't afford this on the seas!" The other orcs moved to follow his orders. The captain studied the silhouettes of the other ships. Each contained such a cage. The new warchief Garrosh had commanded that this venture be completed, regardless of the cost in seeing it done. Briln and the others here had not questioned that cost, either, for all would have readily perished for the legendary overlord of the Warsong offensive. Garrosh's deeds were epic and retold over and over in the Horde. He was also the son of the late Grom Hellscream and had been an advisor to Thrall, the orc leader who had freed their people from captivity. Yes, no matter how many lives it had already cost and would likely cost by
the time the fleet reached its destination, it was all worth it to Briln and the others. The Horde was at last within grasp of its destiny. It had the vitality, the drive, that this altered Azeroth deserved. Those who had held power so long in the world had become decadent . . . too weak and soft. The Horde-and especially the orcs-would finally stake its claim on the more lush regions that it needed not only to survive but finally to thrive as it had long deserved. This recent Cataclysm, so Garrosh had impressed upon his people, was the great sign that this was their day. The world had been torn asunder, and to survive meant to be able to adapt to its much-transformed lands. The crewmembers finally had the last cage loaded. Briln watched as they sealed the hull. They had a fair supply of the sleep powder in stock, and there were other threats that were supposed to keep the creatures in line, but the elder orc looked forward to the end of the journey. Aboard deck, his first mate saluted. "Everything's secured, Captain! All set to sail on your word!" "Get us going, then," Briln growled. "The sooner we get this cargo to Garrosh, the sooner it becomes the Alliance's trouble. . . ." The other orc grunted agreement, then turned to bellow Briln's command. In short order, the ship pulled away from the dock. The winds whirled madly and thunder crashed. A storm was brewing, the last thing the fleet needed. Still, the captain thought it nothing compared to what the Horde's enemies would soon face. Briln stared beyond the dark, swirling waters, imagining the fleet's destination, imagining what his cargo would do once Garrosh had it under his reins. And for a moment, Briln almost pitied Ashenvale's defenders, almost pitied the night elves. But then . . . they were only night elves. . . .
1
THE WOLF
Tyrande Whisperwind knew that the world could never be mended. Deathwing, the great black dragon, had forever changed the face of all Azeroth in a manner even more terrifying in some ways than the Sundering-when the world's lone continent was savagely split apart. The high priestess, who had survived that epic event some ten thousand years ago, had never imagined that she would have to live through anything so brutal again. To those few who might have been unfamiliar with her race, the night elf, her midnight-blue hair falling below her shoulders, seemed barely more than two decades old, rather than ten thousand years. However, her glittering, silver eyes were filled with the wisdom of so much experience. There were some very fine lines near those elegant eyes, but they were more the result of troubled times during the past ten millennia than from age. Tyrande strode through the lush Temple Gardens, the centerpiece-though geographically more west of the center-of Darnassus and composed of several islets of varying size filled with the most exquisite of flora. The light of a full moon shone down upon the gardens and with what appeared particular favor upon her. That it did so disturbed neither Tyrande nor any who happened by the high priestess. After all, it was a normal sight already familiar to those who knew the solemn figure. She had hoped that out here she would be better able to think, to come to some conclusion concerning the weighty matters upon her. As high priestess, Tyrande generally sought guidance and peace from the goddess Elune, also called the Mother Moon, from a place of quiet meditation in the temple directly to the south. However, even the calm of the perpetually moonlit sanctum of the
Sisterhood-the heart of Elune herself, some called it-had no longer proven enough. Thus, she had hoped the tranquil gardens might suffice where the temple had failed. But although the gardens in some ways embodied the spirit of the Mother Moon even more than the temple, it was not enough to calm the high priestess this night. Tyrande could not keep from constantly worrying about the upcoming summit. The time of the gathering was fast approaching, and already she and the archdruid Malfurion Stormrage-her co-ruler and mate-wondered whether the event would prove worth anything at all. The Alliance faced a revitalized Horde now led not by the seemingly conflicted Thrall, who might have kept the peace for the sake of both sides, but rather by a new, much more ambitious warchief. Garrosh coveted the great forests of Ashenvale, though he would hardly stop with them should they fall to his warriors. Despite, as an archdruid, being more concerned with the wilds of Azeroth and having absolutely no ambitions toward politics, Malfurion had done what he could to help maintain unity in the Alliance. However, Tyrande and Malfurion both knew that the Alliance's future did not and could not rely upon him. It was time for someone who could be more dedicated to that goal. That was thus one of the points of this summit Tyrande and Malfurion had put together, to see if through the talks someone would arise who could best guide those assembled forward in this new world. Of course, the gathering would not matter if not all the members were in attendance, and there were some of significance who still had not sent word of their participation. If they did not join, then no true accord would likely be acceptable. Among those Tyrande passed during her trek were other priestesses, all of whom bowed low in homage to her. They were clad in silver-white, sleeveless robes similar to her own. Tyrande wore little ornamentation, needing none to mark her as high priestess. All knew her. She acknowledged their greeting with a smile and a nod of her head, but so engrossed was she in her dark thoughts that, in truth, she forgot the encounters immediately after. The foul vision of Deathwing the Destroyer and what he had caused filled her mind, nearly overwhelming her. Her heart pounded and her blood raced as she imagined the continuing repercussions of his terrifying act.
The summit must prove of benefit, Tyrande thought anxiously. This is the one opportunity we have to stave off the downfall of our world. If nothing comes of this, there will be no hope of attempting another gathering. It will be too late for all of us by then. . . . But they had not received word from three of the major members of the Alliance, including Stormwind . . . and if Stormwind alone did not participate, then- Around her, the light of Elune grew blinding. The Temple Gardens vanished. Tyrande Whisperwind stumbled, then caught herself. Her eyes widened. New surroundings came into view, surroundings not at all even a part of Darnassus, the night elf capital. She now stood in a place far away, a place clearly on the mainland, on the continent of Kalimdor. Tyrande had been transported hundreds of miles in less than a single heartbeat. More shocking than that, she was surrounded by the unmistakable vision of war. The stench of wholesale death was familiar to her, and darkened mounds roughly the size and shape of bodies-mangled ones-were everywhere. What had once been pristine wilderness-a few ruined tree trunks marked that this had once been forest-had clearly been ravaged by previous battles here. As the high priestess fought to regain her composure, it quickly dawned on her that she knew this place, this time, though whether from memory or because of Elune, it was impossible to say. She stood in the midst of Azeroth's first climactic struggle against the Burning Legion . . . a battle fought more than ten thousand years ago during the War of the Ancients. That war had culminated with the Sundering and the sinking of the night elf capital of Zin-Azshari into the waters once housing her people's fount of power-the Well of Eternity. The Legion had sought the end of all life on Azeroth and had come horribly close in achieving that monstrous goal, ironically with the help of the night elves' own queen. The demonic warriors surged forward, the fiery infernals at the vanguard. The massive constructs were followed by felguard and felhounds, the former towering, armored warriors and the latter fearsome, toothy beasts. Other demons added to their monumental numbers. The insidious army rushed over the landscape unhindered, contrary to what the night elf recalled of that history. Anything touched by the demons burst into the same horrific green flame that
surrounded each of the monstrosities. Tyrande looked for those defenders she knew should be here, her own people and the many fantastic allies who had gathered to prevent the destruction of Azeroth. However, they were nowhere to be seen. Nothing blocked the destructive forces. The land, the world, was doomed. . . . But then a powerful howl shook the scene. The high priestess felt her hopes instinctively rise. She felt she should know that howl, for it touched her very soul. The demons faltered, though only for a moment. As one, they let out a mighty roar themselves, then renewed their push forward. From the opposite direction, a great shadow stretched across the landscape. Tyrande followed it to its origin. The wolf Ancient was gigantic, majestic, and so pure white that he all but gleamed. He towered over all else. The huge animal howled again, and this time countless other howls joined in from somewhere behind him. "Goldrinn . . . " Tyrande murmured. From the dawn of its reshaping by the mysterious titans, Azeroth had been guarded by beings who were tied to the world as no other creatures could be. The dragons had been empowered by the titans, but Azeroth itself gave rise to spirits and demigods, creatures eternal in nature yet capable of ultimate sacrifice. But not until the War of the Ancients had any of these protectors faced a threat as terrifying as the Burning Legion. Dragons had perished by the scores, and among the spirits and demigods there were many who fell in the final battle. One of those had been Goldrinn. Yet, this bloody scene before her was not exactly history. Tyrande finally understood that, though her natural instinct was to fear not only for her world but also for the wolf seeking to protect it again. Elune had chosen this urgent scene to tell her something, though the high priestess was at a loss as to what it might be. Was she to watch Goldrinn sacrifice himself once more? Several demons neared the giant wolf, who growled his challenge to them. But as the attackers came upon him, with renewed cries, a vast pack of mortal wolves leapt from the emptiness behind Goldrinn. They poured over the landscape, sleek, furred hunters already sizing up their individual prey. Though they were not as huge as most of the demons, they charged with ferocity and
determination unparalleled. The two forces collided. The demons wielded blades, axes, savage teeth, claws, and more, and knew how to use all of them well. At first it seemed the wolves had only teeth and claws, but their dexterity and swiftness were unmatched. They darted among their sinister foes, snapping and slashing wherever there was an opening. Goldrinn stood at the forefront. The huge wolf seized a felguard in his mouth and bit through. Green flames erupted as the beast let the fragments fall. At the same time his claws crushed through another foe. Two wolves brought down an axe-wielding enemy who had just cleaved in twain one of their brethren. The wolves tore the demon's arms off, then one took out the throat. However, other demons fell upon them, overwhelming the pair. Tyrande strained to join the battle but could not move. She could only watch helplessly as more wolves perished, and even though they seemed to take more than their number in adversaries, that did little to assuage her fears and regrets for them. More and more demons focused on Goldrinn, clearly aware that he was what guided the wolves. The demons tried to hack away at his limbs or drag him down so that they could cut his throat, but Goldrinn shook off those near his paws, batting some away so hard that they crashed into their own comrades. In his savage jaws, the gigantic wolf plucked up one demon after another. Some he bit to pieces like the first; others he shook until the sheer force sent their body parts scattering. Goldrinn barreled through the Burning Legion's ranks, his eager pack ever at his side. Bloody wolf carcasses and dismembered demon corpses already littered the battlefield, but the two sides' numbers appeared undiminished. Another wolf was chopped to pieces, and even more demons attacked Goldrinn. Yet, the enormous wolf was undaunted and continued to claw and bite one foe after another, leaving them piled three and four high in many places. Mother Moon, why do you show this to me?!? The high priestess strained to leap to Goldrinn's aid, but still could not do more than observe. Either let me join this struggle, or tell me the purpose of this endless slaughter, please! But the fight went on without revelation, and, worse, matters suddenly took a dark turn for Goldrinn. Harassed from all sides, the wolf could not fend off all
his opponents. Demons struck him again and again, the growing number of wounds finally beginning to take their toll on the great Ancient. One of the felguard managed to climb atop the white wolf's back. The fiendish warrior, his eyes blazing green in anticipation, raised his weapon and struck hard at the center of the wolf's spine. "No!" Tyrande cried out, realizing what was about to happen. She was well aware of this dire event, though she had never known the details. Goldrinn let out an anguished howl. His legs collapsed beneath him. Demons pushed at him in greater numbers. From somewhere in the madness to the Ancient's right, a single dark-brown wolf leapt up. Though the height should have been beyond his capabilities, the smaller wolf managed to reach not only Goldrinn's back but the demon who had so terribly wounded him as well. The felguard turned just as the wolf neared. The demon attempted to slash at the newcomer, but the sleek, lupine form darted under the axe blade. The wolf then bore into the felguard's legs, toppling his towering foe. Crashing against Goldrinn's back, the demon lost his weapon. The felguard sought to rise, but the wolf was already upon him. With one ferocious bite, the wolf tore out the demon's throat. As the corpse slipped off the side, the lesser wolf howled. He glanced down, then jumped. His leap was not without purpose, for he landed atop another demon harassing Goldrinn, then tore out the chest of that one. Taking the lesser wolf's lead, others of the pack began rending those demons intent on Goldrinn's destruction. The Burning Legion was at last forced to abandon the taking of the wolf Ancient and, indeed, was now pressed back. But it was too late for Goldrinn. The Ancient managed to push himself up and seize in his mouth a demon. He bit through the armor and sinew, spitting out the pieces. But then the wound took its toll. The Ancient collapsed, crushing a few more of his enemies, and then lay unmoving. Again, as had happened more than ten thousand years before, Goldrinn died. Yet, seemingly undaunted by this terrible loss, the dark-brown wolf spearheaded the advance, pushing ahead of Goldrinn's corpse. More and more of the lesser wolves joined their brother, now becoming avengers of their patron. One demonic warrior after another perished at the teeth and claws of the
dark-brown wolf. He howled between adversaries, his cry now as great as that of Goldrinn. He seemed larger, too, more than twice the size of the others. The Burning Legion began to steer their efforts against him, but that seemed only to encourage the brown wolf. He took on every demon that attacked and left in his wake their tattered bodies. With so many demons much taller than him, the wolf even began jumping up on his hind legs in order to better snap at an arm or even a lowered head. His front claws slashed through armor and flesh as well as any blade. A helpless Tyrande let out another gasp. The more she stared at the valiant wolf, the more comfortable he seemed on two legs as opposed to four. The claws of one hand clamped together so tightly that they were as one, and also grew with each successive cut. This was different from what the high priestess had heard had happened during the original battle, and she knew immediately that history had now slipped into something else. This was what Elune truly wished to reveal to her . . . though what it meant was yet a mystery to the night elf. The wolf's claws abruptly became a true greatsword, and the brown wolf fully a man . . . an armored warrior whose face the high priestess could not make out from where she watched. The pack right behind him, he continued to challenge the Burning Legion. His sword thrust again and again. A startling new change followed, but this time among the demons. They transformed, becoming foes equally recognizable and far more imminent: orcs. The transformation was swift and happened without notice by those involved. The wolves tore at the orcs as if they had always been the enemy. Felling another opponent, the shadowed warrior raised his sword and let out a triumphant shout that still had hints of a lupine howl. The wolf pack surged again, but now they also stood on their hind legs, and their forepaws became hands wielding axes, maces, and other weapons. Like their leader, they were now human, albeit even more shadowed than he was. Disarray overtook the orcs. Their numbers dwindled. The lead warrior once again confidently shouted. And from behind the line of battle, in the direction the high priestess knew the body of the wolf Ancient lay, there came an answering howl. Tyrande turned her gaze there . . . and beheld two Goldrinns. The first was the corpse of the slain animal. The second was a glorious, translucent spirit who once more
howled victory. But though the wolf spirit was like mist, there was something else within him, something more solid and somewhat familiar- With a start, the high priestess realized that she was staring at the shadowed leader . . . despite the fact that he should have been at the forefront of the battle. Then, blinking, Tyrande noticed that she was watching the forefront. Both areas had suddenly blended together. Goldrinn's ghostly countenance hovered over his champion, who seemed to grow taller yet. An orc wielding two axes swung at the champion. The warrior deflected the first axe, then swiftly did the same with the second. With a whirl of the sword, he then brought the blade between both axes and thrust it deep into the orc's chest. Blood spurted from the gaping wound as the champion pulled the weapon free. The orc gaped, staggered. His eyes glazed. The axes fell from his twitching fingers. The hulking orc dropped to his knees. His body shook and blood flowed from his mouth, dribbling over his jaw and tusks. The shadowed hero took a step back. The orc fell forward, landing face-first at his slayer's feet. As he perished, so, too, did the last of his comrades. The battle was over. The spectral Goldrinn let out a new howl. Then, he and the warrior fully blended together. At the same time, the shadowed champion at last turned his gaze toward Tyrande. His face was finally visible. . . . And at that moment, the high priestess returned to the Temple Gardens. Tyrande wavered briefly, then quickly regained her composure. There was no one else in sight, perhaps coincidence, perhaps Elune's intention. Tyrande also suspected that not even a second had passed in the mortal world. The high priestess did not question being suddenly thrust into the vision. Elune had clearly wished to relay something of such urgency to her that it could not wait. Understanding what it was, Tyrande was grateful, yet a bit confused. She realized that someone was approaching her. Smoothing her silver robes, the high priestess met the gaze of one of General Shandris Feathermoon's aides. The Sentinel looked a bit flushed, as if she had been running hard. The female Sentinel-her torso, forearms, and legs protected by light armor
-knelt with the utmost deference before Tyrande, not only because the high priestess was their leader, but also because the general was Tyrande's adopted daughter. The warrior was armed with one of the favored weapons of the night elves, a triple-bladed moonglaive. Keeping her head down, the other night elf said, "The general knew that you would wish to see this immediately, High Priestess." The Sentinel held forth a small parchment that bore Shandris's personal seal. Taking the missive and dismissing the aide, Tyrande broke the seal and read the contents. The message was short and to the point, as was the general's way. Word arrives that the king of Stormwind will be joining the summit. There was nothing more save Shandris's mark at the bottom. The news was significant in one great respect in that if Stormwind was a part of the gathering, then the other holdouts would quickly send word of their coming as well. The high priestess and Malfurion had been hoping that Stormwind would agree to be part, though of late they had been concerned that its ruler might instead decide the kingdom's fortunes were better without its troubled neighbors. But of even more significance to the high priestess was the timing of this news. She knew that Shandris had only just received it herself a few minutes before and that, as the general always did, Shandris had made certain that her beloved ruler and mother would share in that knowledge as swiftly as possible. Elune had intended for the vision to coincide with the arrival of the missive. "So, Varian is coming . . . ," Tyrande murmured. "It all makes sense now. I should have seen it." And the vision now became clear. The night elf had only had a glimpse of the face, but even then she had been certain that the shadowed champion resembled none other than King Varian Wrynn of Stormwind. Naturally, the Mother Moon had known, but could only give her high priestess a sign when there was something that could actually be done with that knowledge. "Varian Wrynn," she repeated, recalling so much about the king's troubled past in that name. He had been a slave, a gladiator, a man with no memory of his true self. He had watched his kingdom fall and fought to take it back from none other than what had turned out to be the daughter of Deathwing in human guise. And during those terrible times, when Varian had lost his name and had been forced to fight for his life nearly every day for the pleasure of spectators, he
had been given another name by those in attendance, a uniquely important name. He had been-and still was by many-called Lo'Gosh. Lo'Gosh . . . another name for the ghost wolf, Goldrinn.
The two cloaked travelers disembarked from the small boat. That they were night elves like the majority of the inhabitants of Rut'theran Village was evidenced in their build and their ears, which shoved back the fabric of their deep hoods. Their faces remained in shadow.
The port village was humble by night elf standards but exceedingly fresh in appearance, for all the buildings were new. It was actually the second settlement by the name, the first destroyed by the sea during the Cataclysm. The second most significant characteristic of the port other than its three docks was the hippogryph breeding area, where eggs of the astonishing winged creatures who acted as aerial transport for the night elves were meticulously cared for and the young were raised. The most significant aspect of the island was something the pair of travelers had been viewing for quite some time. In fact, they had seen it from miles away on the mainland . . . just as anyone else in this region would have. Teldrassil was the name given for the island, but only as an afterthought. The island was only an extension of the true Teldrassil . . . a titanic tree filling most of the land and rising so high, the top vanished in the clouds. Its branches were so vast that they dwarfed some kingdoms. The thick crown could have housed an entire civilization-and did. Indeed, Teldrassil was known as the second World Tree. The first, ancient Nordrassil, still lived, but had yet to recover from the violence of the Third War -again, against the Burning Legion-only a few years prior. While Nordrassil had provided immortality, good health, protection from the misuses of the Well of Eternity's magic, and an open path to the Emerald Dream, the second World Tree had served mainly as the new home for the night elf race. Even then Teldrassil had already had its share of troubles. The tree had been tainted by the evil of the Nightmare Lord through his puppet, the archdruid Fandral Staghelm. That taint had spread to the flora and fauna upon Teldrassil, and only recently had the tree been cleansed. But as inspiring as the vast tree was to all who saw it, the newcomers almost
appeared oblivious to its presence now. The taller of the traveling pair-male, with long, silver hair spilling out from his hood-paused to eye with much interest the adult hippogryphs. The slighter and clearly female figure at his side coughed harshly and teetered against her companion. The male quickly turned his attention from the avian creatures and tightened his hold on her. "The portal," he murmured. "It will be nearby and quicker. Just hold on . . . we are almost there. Hold on . . . please!" The female's hood briefly bobbed up and down. "I will . . . do my best . . . my husband. . . ." Her reply was very weak, and by the stiffening of his form the male showed his grave concern for his mate. Guiding her forward, he searched for what neither had ever seen but should have been readily identifiable. A Sentinel officer noticed the pair. Her gaze swept over the concealing cloaks. Frowning, her glaive gripped at the ready, she confronted them. "Welcome, visitors," she said. "May I ask from where you come?" The male looked at her, his face briefly becoming visible. The Sentinel's words trailed off, and her face flushed with shock. "You . . ." Without a word, the male led his mate past the stunned officer. As he did, that which he sought became visible through the buildings and the crowd. "The portal . . . ," he murmured. A stone path followed a gentle slope up to Teldrassil. At the base of the tree loomed a tall portal, a huge, shimmering mark in Darnassian script emanating from its side. Yet, even as high as it stood, the magical entry was dwarfed by some of the great roots arcing down from Teldrassil. The portal was a magical, direct link to the city far, far above. Two Sentinels were the only evident guards, but the male traveler knew that there were others hidden near and, in addition, safety measures built into and around the structure. Undaunted, he led his mate toward the portal. The Sentinels eyed him suspiciously. From behind the travelers came the officer's voice. "Let them pass unhindered." The guards did not question the command. The male traveler did not waste time turning to thank the officer; all that mattered was getting his mate to Darnassus . . . to help.
"Watch your footing," he whispered to her. She managed a nod. They had succeeded in making it to the portal itself. His hopes rose. Almost there! A fit of coughing overtook her. It became so brutal that he lost his grip on her. She fell to her knees, her hooded face nearly to the stone. He quickly retrieved her, but as he helped her straighten, the soft patter of liquid caught his ear. A small pool of blood decorated the area near where her face had hovered. "Not again . . ." Her hand, which held his, suddenly squeezed with the incredible strength of the truly fearful. "Husband-" She collapsed in his arms. The guards moved to assist, but he had no time for them. They might even suggest that he wait while they check on her condition. But in his harried thoughts, any second meant disaster . . . loss. . . . His only hope was reaching the high priestess. Gripping his slumped mate, the male lunged into the portal.
2
INCURSION
Moving against the slight breeze passing through the forest, the long, thick branches from the nearby trees stretched down. The leafy appendages moved with utmost purpose toward the bearded figure they surrounded. He stared up at the oncoming branches and did nothing . . . but smile. Malfurion Stormrage stood silent as leaves from the first branches caressed his face. Even among those of his calling, he was unique. At first, it appeared that he was adorned with the marks of the great animals whose shapes those most versed in his calling could summon. Only closer inspection revealed that some of these attributes were a part of him, the results of his ties to Azeroth and the many years his spirit had spent in the Emerald Dream. While his dreamform had become more and more attuned to that other realm, his sleeping body- still bound to his spirit-had begun to take on elements of these powerful creatures. Thus, the edges of his arms grew into the expansive gray wings of the storm crow. The nightsaber, its bond especially close to those of Malfurion's race, was marked by what were not boots but the archdruid's very feet. They now mimicked the look of the feline's mighty paws. In addition to all this, his kilt bore in front as decoration the curved teeth of the nightsaber, and his hands were clad in gloves ending in the claws of the bear. One mark that had nothing to do with beasts and perhaps more with Malfurion in particular was the blue bolts of lightning that crossed his torso from shoulder to opposing side of the waist. Smaller, complementing bolts darted from his elbow down his forearm. Stormrage was not merely the archdruid's surname; it was also a hint of the tremendous power at his command, power that he sought to use only when all other efforts failed.
The ends of the branches shifted his long green hair, but artfully avoided that which most made the proud-featured night elf stand out from his brethren. Magnificent antlers, more than a good two feet in length, sprouted from his forehead. They were a sign of his deep ties to Azeroth and his shan'do-his honored teacher-the demigod Cenarius, and also represented the form of the stag. Some of the stronger branches shifted under his arms. Then, as gently as a parent lifting an infant, the branches took Malfurion up among the trees. The archdruid opened his mind and touched the heart of Teldrassil. Malfurion studied its health and saw that there was no apparent taint left from the sinister grafting attached by the mad archdruid Fandral Staghelm. Malfurion gave thanks for that; he had been against the creation of the second World Tree, but it had become an integral part of night elf existence. Yet, that it had become so had been the opposite intention of Fandral, who had first proposed the tree in Malfurion's absence. To the other archdruid, Teldrassil had been only a means to a monstrous end, which, thankfully, had been averted. Despite the lack of any noticeable taint, Malfurion swore to keep monitoring the tree. There was still a pocket of the Nightmare remaining in the Emerald Dream, and as long as any trace of that darkness existed, renewed corruption threatened Teldrassil and, thus, the night elf race. Still, satisfied as to the World Tree's present condition, Malfurion took a moment to survey his surroundings. A moonwell-one of the sacred founts of water known for their mystical properties-stood not all that far from the archdruid. He had chosen the Oracle Glade northeast of the city for what his senses indicated was its unique tie to the gargantuan tree in which it was nestled. Here, the archdruid felt he could best meditate and, using his spirit-or dreamform-reach out to the Emerald Dream. The druids still traveled with their dreamforms to the other realm, but did so with some new precautions. Malfurion had not taken long to return to that place, despite having been trapped there for years by the Nightmare Lord. He did not consider himself courageous for having made the choice; the archdruid hoped to further study the Emerald Dream for any changes he might have missed earlier . . . and also use this particular journey to clear his mind of certain thoughts. As if to mock his hopes, a sharp twinge suddenly went through him. It was
not the first he had felt of late, nor did he think it would be the last. Mortality was beginning to catch up with him. The archdruid had witnessed the aging of comrades belonging to other races, but to experience it was admittedly not so simple a thing, even if his race was still much longer-lived than humans or dwarves. Malfurion fought down a brief moment of petulance, of thinking that he was not supposed to grow old. The twinge had disrupted his thoughts. Trying to restore his calm, Malfurion focused deep into Teldrassil's being. He felt his center calming. Seeking Teldrassil's touch to help him reach the point where he could separate his dreamform from his body had proven correct after all. His body now lay nestled in the boughs, protected by the trees that were in their way an extension of the larger one upon which they grew. Malfurion's dreamform rose above his still body. Ghostly and emerald in shading, it hovered for a moment- Malfurion! As if thrust by a terrible wind, the archdruid's dreamform flew back into his mortal shell. He knew who reached out to him, for she had a unique link to him. Tyrande? the archdruid immediately responded. At an unspoken request by Malfurion, the branches were already lowering him to the ground. Tyrande! What is it? Too much to be said now! Please come! The urgency in her tone was undeniable. The moment his feet touched the ground, Malfurion hurried on. But after a few steps he found the pace too slow. Concentrating, the archdruid leaned forward. His bones made crackling sounds as they shifted, and his skin rippled and sprouted fur. The archdruid's face extended, the nose and mouth becoming part of a wide muzzle adorned with long whiskers. Malfurion's teeth grew and his eyes narrowed. His shape transformed, becoming a huge, dark cat akin to one of the saber-toothed felines the night elves used for mounts. Malfurion's pace increased tenfold and more. The sleek cat darted out of the glade. The short distance to Darnassus passed swiftly. Sentinels who saw him approaching wisely stepped aside, aware of who it was rushing to the city in such a form. The archdruid's cat shape was a recognizable thing to the defenders of the city, who had witnessed its power in
battle. Much of the city was divided into what were called "terraces," where elements of night elf civilization concentrated. The Warrior's Terrace was already behind him, and that of the Craftsmen was already to his right. Malfurion scarcely noticed either, just as he paid little mind to the elegant and artistically formed gardens and lake that were the center of Darnassus. His focus was on the shining edifice to the south, the Temple of the Moon. But something did suddenly intrude on his concentration, an unsettling gathering of night elves. Malfurion smelled their anxiety, and that stirred his other feline emotions. He bared his great saberlike teeth and dug harder at the ground with his sharp claws as he turned to find out what was the cause. Even before he came to a halt, the archdruid had resumed his true form. The night elves nearest had already scattered from the cat's path, and now they and others who had noticed Malfurion bowed in respect to the august figure. However, Malfurion paid them no mind, for he now knew what had so caught the throng's attention . . . and why from them there had radiated such a high level of anxiety. The hooded figure stumbled toward the same destination in which the archdruid had been heading, but his efforts were slowed incredibly by the terrible burden in his arms. The shape under the other travel cloak was clearly female and also a night elf. Malfurion could not make out the male's visage, but the hood had slipped from the female's. The slack mouth was a grim enough sign. A Sentinel tried to give aid to the female's companion, but the male shook the guard off. The Sentinel retreated with an odd respect in both her expression and stance. The same Sentinel glanced beyond the stricken figure to Malfurion. With some relief, she started, "Archdruid! Praise Elune-" "'Archdruid'?" The hooded male gasped out the word, as if it meant all the world to him. A sudden shock ran through Malfurion. He could not place the voice, but, even though it was clearly changed by stress and other factors, it was one he should have known very well. Gingerly adjusting his precious burden, the male shifted enough to peer over his shoulder at Malfurion.
The agony that gripped the male had made some distinct changes in the face. However, the archdruid still immediately recognized the night elf before him even though it had been centuries since the latter had last been among their kind. Malfurion could scarcely believe his eyes; he had gradually come to the conclusion that accident or some other violent demise had taken the hooded figure long ago. The name escaped as a whisper of disbelief. "Jarod Shadowsong . . ."
Haldrissa Woodshaper had been a Sentinel since nearly the creation of that army. Although she had been born some centuries before its general, Shandris, Haldrissa had recognized the skills in her leader and eagerly learned. She had thus risen up in the ranks, well earning her position as a commander.
Narrow of face and with a persistently wrinkled brow-as if she were always deep in thought-Haldrissa had just prior to the Cataclysm been promoted to overseeing night elf forces in Ashenvale. Although far from Teldrassil and Darnassus, Ashenvale, located in the northern half of the continent of Kalimdor and stretching across much of its width, was not only sacred to her people but of significance to the preservation of their civilization. The night elves and their allies carefully harvested only select areas of the vast forests, making certain not to disturb nature any more than necessary. Haldrissa squinted as she peered into the forest ahead of her party. Like the others, she rode astride one of the muscular cats called nightsabers after their long, curved fangs. Both night elves and nightsabers were, as their names suggested, nocturnal creatures, but circumstance more and more demanded that they move about during the day too. Most of the other races with which they dealt were diurnal, day dwellers, which did not preclude their being active at night . . . which presented her with the most complicated and potentially deadly aspect of her role here. There had been no sign of nearby activity by the Horde, but Haldrissa knew better than to trust the orcs and their allies to stay in the eastern side. Bad enough that they had a foothold in Ashenvale at all. "What do you see, Xanon?" she asked of the male night elf to her left. He was not the most senior of her officers, but he was known for his sharp eyes, even among the Sentinels. "Anything amiss?" Xanon leaned forward a moment, then replied, "All clear to me,
Commander." No one else indicated otherwise. Haldrissa signaled the party to move on. The commander led a contingent of some fifty night elves on the way to inspect one of the foremost posts. Haldrissa made it a point to do regular inspections herself; nothing kept post commanders on their toes better than the knowledge that she would be checking on them. The post was only another hour's ride. The reason for the halt had been what thus far appeared to be a lapse on the part of the officer in charge. Haldrissa insisted that guards be set up to face not only the directions from which the Horde could be expected to attack, but also those from which it could not. If Haldrissa could imagine successfully sneaking past a post and either attacking it from behind or moving on to attack locations deeper within night elf territory, then surely the orcs' new warchief could. A short distance later, Haldrissa turned to Denea, her second-in-command. "I want two scouts to ride to the post, then report back . . . without being seen." Denea summoned the riders needed, then sent them off. Haldrissa watched the pair first become two blurs, then vanish into the distance. She hid a moment of frustration; her vision was not as sharp as it had been only a few months before. In fact, it seemed to have worsened in the past few days. "Weapons at the ready," she ordered the others. Denea, who already had her bow out, repeated the order. They moved on, noticing nothing and growing more suspicious because of that. Haldrissa estimated the time the scouts would need to reach the post and get back to her, and knew that there was still quite a wait. Thus it was that the growl of a nightsaber racing toward them only minutes later sent her and her fighters into preparations for immediate battle. The beast was sorely wounded, arrows pin-cushioning its hide. That it had gotten this far was a credit to its stamina. Blood stained its claws and teeth, showing that it had not left the struggle without inflicting pain on its attackers as well. And astride it, very dead, was one of the scouts. Xanon let out an epithet and looked all for urging his cat forward. He was not the only one, either. Haldrissa waved the eager ones back, not that she intended to hold off pursuit. Denea already had the dying nightsaber beside hers. She looked over the rider and scowled.
"We will have to leave her here for the time being. We can retrieve her on the way back so that she can receive a proper burial." Haldrissa nodded to her second. Denea and another Sentinel swiftly dismounted and removed the body from the suffering cat. Gently setting their comrade beside the nearest tree, they returned to the nightsaber. The cat panted heavily. Up close, the intensity of the wounds was more evident. There was blood everywhere. The nightsaber peered up at Denea with eyes filled with pain. One of its sabers was broken. The wounded mount coughed violently, throwing up more blood. It was clear that nothing could be done to save the beast. Drawing her dagger, Denea leaned down and murmured to the animal. The night-saber gently licked the hand that held the weapon, then calmly closed its eyes in what was clearly expectation. Gritting her teeth, Denea expertly slit its throat. The animal died instantly. "Spread out!" Haldrissa ordered as her second-in-command mounted again. "Xanon . . . you take those up that way. Denea, take your group to the south. The rest, with me." Moments later the night elves cautiously moved into the area in question. Haldrissa's nightsaber sniffed the air and snarled low. The commander quieted her beast with a touch of her hand to its head, then slowly reached for her bow. An arrow struck the warrior beside her. The strike was a perfect one, piercing the throat. It had also come from above. Quickly nocking an arrow, Haldrissa raised her bow to fire. Before she could, though, two swiftly spinning glaives shot up in the direction from which the arrow had come. The arched, triple-bladed weapons cut a deadly swathe into the foliage. A pained grunt escaped from the treetop. One of the glaives darted back out of the tree, returning to its wielder. The other reappeared a second later-buried in the chest of an orc. The enemy archer dropped like a stone to the ground, his slashed body sprawling. But even before the orc's corpse had the opportunity to settle, from out of the forest ahead charged nearly a dozen of his fellows, many astride powerful black wolves. Axes, spears, and swords raised high, the orcs plunged toward Haldrissa's group.
The night elves wasted no time in meeting the charge. Haldrissa fired once at the first orc approaching, but what should have been a clear shot ended up only piercing the shoulder. The wound was not enough to even slow the brawny orc, who then tried to bury his axe in the skull of her mount. Another shot from above hit a nearby nightsaber in the neck. The animal stumbled, sending its rider flying forward. An opportunistic orc leapt from his wolf and swung at the fallen night elf. The Sentinel turned, trying to defend herself, but was too slow. The orc's axe bit into her chest near the collarbone. The wounded nightsaber sought to attack the orc, only to be confronted by the warrior's wolf. The two great beasts tore into one another with fang and claw, each seeking an opening. The nightsaber had some advantage in size, but the wound slowed it. Steering around the monstrous pair, Haldrissa fired at the orc. Up close, she could not miss. The force of the bolt as it sank into the orc's chest sent the dying attacker flying back several feet. Another arrow whistled past the commander's ear. Cursing, Haldrissa fired back at where she thought it had originated. Her arrow evidently missed, but it forced the orc in the tree to move more into the open, where a bolt from the south finished him. Waving her bow, Denea let out a triumphant cry, then led her group in against the orcs. At the same time Xanon's surged in from the north. Steel met steel. Nightsabers clashed with wolves. Denea had changed her bow for a glaive. She slashed through the throat of a slavering wolf as it seized her by the leg. Her sleek, raven-colored hair, bound in a tail, darted like a whip as she looked this way and that for her next foe. The orcs fought savagely . . . even more savagely than Haldrissa had expected. They left themselves open at times, seeming to prefer simply to try to get to an enemy no matter what the risk. While by sheer force they kept the larger contingent of night elves momentarily at bay, the odds were clearly too great against them. Could it be-? the commander started to realize, only to have to forgo completion of the thought as another mounted orc dove in at her. Haldrissa dropped her bow and brought up her glaive, using the nearest of the curved blades to deflect the axe. Her arm shook as the two weapons rang together. The wolf dodged to the side of her nightsaber's claws in order to give its
rider a better opening. The commander's cat twisted to protect Haldrissa, but the orc had already swung. The foremost blade cracked under the force of the strike. The upper half flew into Haldrissa's face. She felt stinging pain by her left eye, then her sight there vanished. A wetness spread over her left cheek, and she nearly passed out from shock. A part of her mind screamed, The orc! Beware the orc! One hand clutching her ruined eye, Haldrissa tried to focus on her foe. Through her tears, she made out his general shape. He was nearly upon her, even with the nightsaber now doing its best to fend off the wolf. Haldrissa twisted the glaive in order to bring one of the remaining blades between her and where she thought the axe was. Her head pounded, and the outline of the orc faded. She knew she was going to die. But the killing blow never came. Instead, the nightsaber ceased its violent rocking, as if the battle between it and the wolf had come to a sudden conclusion. "Commander!" someone shouted in her ear. She recognized Denea's voice. "The orc-" "The orc is slain!" A slim hand seized her weapon arm. As Haldrissa blinked away tears from her remaining eye, Denea came into focus. "Be still, Commander! You need aid, quickly!" "The battle-" "Is over! The orcs are slain to a warrior, their wolves perishing with them!" A prisoner would have been good to have, Haldrissa knew, but a capture could not always be accomplished in the midst of frenzied fighting. As another Sentinel came around her blind side and began working on her wound, Haldrissa finally managed to better focus on the situation. One thing immediately came to mind. "The outpost . . . we must reach the outpost. . . ." She was forced to wait while they finished with her eye, and even then Xanon suggested that they turn around. Haldrissa began to feel like an old grandparent rather than their commander, and grew angry. The other night elves acquiesced to her orders, and the party finally raced toward the outpost, all expecting the worst.
But as they neared the wooden structure, to their surprise, a pair of sentries stepped out from among the trees. They looked stunned by the party's appearance, especially that of the commander, who now sported a long cloth over the damaged side of her face. Before they could speak, Haldrissa quickly asked, "The outpost-all is well?" They glanced at one another in some confusion, one finally replying, "Yes, Commander! It has been very quiet!" "Were there other sentries posted in the trees behind us?" "Two . . ." There had been no sign of either the pair or the other scout Haldrissa had sent. She had no doubts as to their fate. "A scouting force," Denea declared to her. "They managed to maneuver around the outpost without being caught, but the missing sentries must have run across them." A dark smile crossed her features. "Well, they will not be ferreting out any secrets to pass back to their warchief; we have seen to that and avenged our lost comrades as well!" Xanon and the others seemed to agree with her, but Haldrissa remained silent. She thought of the fatalistic determination of the orcs as they had thrown themselves against impossible odds. Such an act was not extraordinary where orcs were concerned: they often reveled in showing their willingness to sacrifice themselves. "But what were they sacrificing themselves for?" she murmured to herself. "What did you say, Commander?" Denea asked. The pain from her wound coursed through Haldrissa, forcing her to put a hand to her head. Still, the notion of what had truly happened burned deep. "Send word ahead to the outpost. Have them survey the area carefully-" "You think there are more orcs?" "No." She wished she were wrong. That would help matters. They were too late, though. The attackers had done their part, giving their lives for the Horde. "No . . . by now they have slipped back through. . . ." There had been forays by orcs in the past, but something about this particular one struck her as sinister. The Horde had never sent a party this deep in this region, and certainly not one of such size. She would have to send word to the general as soon as possible. For months, Shandris and the high priestess had been awaiting some act by the Horde that
hinted of a change in the delicate balance between the two factions. Haldrissa now believed she had witnessed that very act. But what does this incursion augur? the wounded commander wondered anxiously. She had no answer. Still, whatever form it would take, the one thing Haldrissa did know was that there would be much, much more blood than had been spilled this day. Much more.
3
JAROD SHADOWSONG
"She is dying . . . my Shalasyr is dying!" the male night elf blurted to the archdruid. Jarod Shadowsong's face was lined like no night elf's that Malfurion had ever seen. While some of those lines had probably been the result of Jarod's life away from his people, others were clearly more recent and likely had to do with the unmoving female so carefully held in his arms. Jarod's hair and beard had silvered, a stark change from how Malfurion recalled him. Jarod had been younger than Malfurion when they had first met- more than a thousand years, in fact-but the silvering and the lines made him look that much older than the archdruid. Malfurion wondered what the night elf before him had lived through since their last meeting. "Jarod . . . " It felt so strange to Malfurion to say the name, the two not having seen one another in nearly ten thousand years. "It has been a long time since we last met," the former commander and stilllegendary hero from the War of the Ancients murmured, his eyes hollow. "Forgive me for coming to you like this. . . ." Malfurion waved aside Jarod's apology. Looking over Shalasyr, he saw how grave her condition was. "I could try to heal her, but I think it best if we bring her straight to Tyrande so that we have all options available to us! Quickly, now!" Jarod looked hesitant to surrender any part of his hold on his companion, but at last he let the archdruid aid him. As the throng watched in absolute silence, the pair carried Shalasyr toward the temple. The two Sentinels at the entrance moved respectfully aside as the archdruid neared. One gaped at the sight of Jarod; even with the cropped beard and long,
loose mane-both utterly silvered now-there was something in his weathered face that remained absolutely recognizable to any who had seen him in the past. "She will save you," Malfurion heard the onetime captain murmur to the still female. "Tyrande will save you. . . . She will speak with Elune. . . ." Malfurion hid his frown. Shalasyr felt extremely limp, and from the position by which he held her the archdruid could not tell if she breathed. She was beyond his power at this point, which only left Elune. Yet, how much would even the moon goddess do in such a drastic case? Through the corridors of stone and living wood they rushed. Some of the priestesses they saw quickly offered assistance, but the archdruid understood that only his beloved would have the power to help Jarod's mate at this point. Her personal guard came to attention as Malfurion and his companions neared the sanctum she utilized in her role as high priestess. One of the guards wordlessly opened the way. Malfurion noted how every set of eyes focused first on Jarod before taking in Shalasyr. Everyone had long assumed that Jarod Shadowsong had perished at some point during the past millennia, else why would he not have returned to his people during some of their most desperate moments? They were not even through the entrance before Tyrande met them. Jarod started to speak, but the high priestess shook her head. She directed them to take Shalasyr to a long, sloping couch next to her, then bade the attendants without to close the doors. Her expression grave, the high priestess went down on one knee next to the other female. Tyrande began murmuring a prayer under her breath, and her hands continuously passed over Shalasyr's body. The light spread from the high priestess to Shalasyr. Jarod let out a hopeful gasp. The two males watched with anticipation as the soft silver light settled down over the stricken figure. Without warning, the light faded. Tyrande pulled back. A sound escaped her, one that Malfurion recognized from times in the past. "Jarod," Tyrande said in a low voice as she rose and turned. "Jarod . . . I am sorry. . . ." "No!" He shoved past the archdruid. "I told her she could get help here! I told her you or Malfurion could save her! Why will you not save her?"
Tyrande halted his lunge toward Shalasyr with a simple touch of her hands against his shoulders. Eyes more hollow, tears beginning to stream, the former guard captain from lost Suramar stared into the high priestess's sympathetic gaze. "She had already slipped away. There was nothing that could be done." He looked aghast. "No . . . I brought her as soon as I could! I pushed for us to reach here-" His own gaze veered toward Shalasyr. "I did it, then! I pushed her too hard! She would be alive if I had not-" Tyrande shook her head. "You know that is not true. Her fate was cast. She knows that you did all that anyone could have done. It was simply meant to be -" "Shalasyr!" Jarod dropped down next to his mate. He clutched her face to his shoulder. Malfurion quietly joined his own mate. They watched in solemn respect as Jarod rocked back and forth and whispered to his lost wife. Finally, Jarod looked back to his hosts. Tears still slid down his cheeks and into his beard, but his voice sounded stronger now, more resigned to the truth. "We both feared that she would not make it, but we both agreed that it was best. Yet . . . I remember from her tone at times . . . now that I look back on it . . . she knew the truth. She did this more for me than for her own life. She wanted me to come back here to be with others, not be alone when she . . . she passed." "You called her 'Shalasyr,'" Tyrande replied soothingly. "I thought I recognized her. She was a novice here for a time. We all assumed she had wandered away from the old city and that some accident had subsequently befallen her, even though searchers found no body. No one knew that she and you were together, though the timing of your mutual disappearances should have spoken volumes to us. . . . Yet we never made the connection. . . ." "We kept our love secret . . . mainly out of concern on my part. I had already considered leaving everything . . . long before. I had grown disenchanted with the polarization of our society. Your druids-forgive me, Malfurion-your druids had been becoming more and more remote, spending most of their time away or in the Emerald Dream rather than sharing in the responsibilities of keeping our people safe and secure. . . ." The archdruid said nothing. He had heard this from others, including Tyrande. The guilt for all those centuries of abandonment still remained with
him. Jarod exhaled. "And though I loved her with all my heart, I hoped that she would see the folly of being with me. I believed that if and when I chose to depart, I would save her from having to answer questions about my choice." "Jarod . . . ," Malfurion began, but the other male continued as if hearing nothing. "Instead, she proved determined to follow my path, wherever it might lead. She always tried to do what I wanted, even when I tried my best to see to her happiness. . . . " Jarod kissed Shalasyr's forehead. "Little fool . . . first she wastes her life following me into the wilderness . . . and then she sacrifices what strength she has to ensure I return here so that I will not be . . . alone. . . ." Softly placing a hand on his shoulder, Tyrande said, "You are always welcome among us. She knew that. She also seems to have savored her life with you, or else she would not have stayed with you all these centuries." "We did have many moments of joy. She loved the wilderness, I admit. In some ways, more than I did, even." "I shall see to arrangements for her. She will receive proper rites." He looked up at her, then down at Shalasyr again. "She is dead." Still holding his beloved, Jarod rose. He accepted no assistance as, with tender care, he adjusted Shalasyr's position on the couch. To all appearances, she was sleeping. "It barely seems any time since the illness touched her." The high priestess and the archdruid looked at each other. With the loss of their immortality, the night elves as a race had begun to experience afflictions that they had only witnessed in others. There had been a few other deaths, and Shalasyr's showed that there would be more and more as time went on, deaths that could not be avoided. "I had heard rumors," Jarod went on, straightening. "It is all true, then. We are mortal, are we not?" After Malfurion nodded, the former guard captain grunted. "Meaning no offense, but I think that a good thing, even with this happening." His hands curled into fists as he looked at Shalasyr. "We were so damned complacent about our great station in the world and our endless, jaded lives, and that is why the Legion nearly slaughtered us all." A different darkness spread across his weathered face, one that Tyrande and her mate recalled from the far past. Malfurion quickly stepped over to Jarod and deftly guided him from Shalasyr. "You are exhausted. You need food and drink,
also-" "How can I sleep or eat?" "Shalasyr would want you to take care of yourself," Tyrande added from Jarod's other side. "And I promise you that I will spare no effort for her." "I should stay-" The archdruid shook his head. "No. Give yourself the time you need to be able to better honor her. I know where to find some healthy fare and perhaps how to bring some calm to your heart. Once you have recuperated, you can return and help oversee the final arrangements." To his relief, Jarod acquiesced. However, he looked back at his mate one last time. "I would like a moment alone with her, if I may. . . ." "Of course." They watched him kneel beside Shalasyr once more. Jarod took her hands in his, leaned close, and whispered. Malfurion and Tyrande stepped out of the chamber. There they took the opportunity to briefly discuss another matter. "Varian is coming to the summit," Tyrande quietly informed her husband. "So Shandris's contacts say. It worries me, though, that we still have no official confirmation from Stormwind." "We both know that if Shandris trusts her information, it is generally true. Good. One way or another, the news will filter to the other kingdoms. If Stormwind is attending, the remaining holdouts will rush to join." He frowned. "As to whether he is coming to ensure the success of the summit or to condemn it . . . we will have to wait and see." "If we do not hear official word from Stormwind before he arrives, it may be the latter." "Unfortunately, too true." Malfurion's frown deepened. "But you could have told me all this when you initially contacted me." "There is more." She described Elune's vision and what it had revealed. He brooded over the revelation for a breath or two, then asked, "You have faith you could not be mistaken?" "The Mother Moon made it abundantly clear." "It makes sense in great part, and yet not in other ways." He brooded for a moment. "Leave this matter to me. I will see that somehow things come together . . . if it is indeed Varian Wrynn on whom the Alliance's future most depends."
Tyrande accepted his decision to take control of that situation with a nod. Then, also eyeing Jarod, she continued, "We have another, more personal situation here . . . perhaps two. Jarod left behind some unfinished relationships of significance." "Those will have to come to their proper conclusions without our efforts. There is so much more at stake. I welcome Jarod back . . . but his life is his own to master, in the long run." They glanced back into the chamber. At that moment the newly returned Jarod rose again. Malfurion and Tyrande heard him exhale deeply as he gave his Shalasyr one last kiss. "Let us hope Shandris and his sister see it that way," the high priestess wryly returned under her breath as they moved to attend to their old friend. "Though I doubt they will."
Most night elves of military status utilized the training areas in the Warrior's Terrace to hone their skills. There they had the use of target ranges and dueling grounds. The night elves were respected by both their allies and enemies as strong and skilled fighters, especially General Shandris Feathermoon's Sentinels.
But Maiev Shadowsong was no Sentinel and considered herself far more skilled and dedicated than any of them, including their commander. Indeed, in her opinion the Sentinels knew nothing about dedication . . . and sacrifice. Her face was narrower than many night elves', and weathered. Scars marked her face-scars from both battle and torture. She had been warrior, jailor, prisoner, executioner. Her eyes held a fatalistic gleam. Her armor was more elaborate than that of a Sentinel, with a thick breastplate, heavy shoulderguards, and high metal boots, all of a dark silver-gray bordered by a golden bronze. Wicked gauntlets ending in claws covered both hands, and even the draping forest-green cloak was lined with sharp blades that were not merely for show. A face-obscuring helm lay to the side of where she trained, with it a jagged, round blade known as an umbra crescent. There had been a title for what she had once been-what she still considered herself-though some no longer saw purpose in it. Those were the same people who did not sufficiently understand the dangers facing the night elf race, dangers against which the Sentinels were poorly equipped both physically and mentally. Fortunately, Maiev had found others who still saw as she did and so
had begun recruiting and training the best of those to rebuild the elite force wiped out by Malfurion's brother. The elite force known as the Watchers. For some ten millennia, Maiev had been a Watcher. Their leader-the warden, in fact. The Watchers, originally volunteers from the ranks of the Sisters of Elune and later also chosen from those outside the temple, had been charged with the daunting task of acting as jailors for the traitor Illidan Stormrage and, later, other monstrous criminals from not just the night elves but other races as well. As leader, Maiev had made Illidan her utmost priority . . . and utmost focus. No, in Maiev's view, the Watchers had been a far more dedicated force than even the Sentinels. Maiev practiced her skills, not in the Warrior's Terrace, but out in the forest beyond. There, she could unleash the energy ever pent-up inside her. This day she practiced with smaller blades-daggers-striking out at preselected targets while bounding through the area. One after another, the daggers sank deep into the centers of their targets, no matter at what angle Maiev threw them. It was not by skill alone that her aim was so perfect, though. Incentive pushed her as much. In her mind, each target bore the visage of a male night elf whose eyes were covered by cloth, as if he were blind. Sometimes the details of the face changed, but it was ever recognizable in her thoughts. She knew that face better than her own, having stared at it so much. In fact, her current exercise was also a futile attempt to eradicate the memory. But still she tried, slaying him again and again. That she had done so in truth did not matter. Whether as a cunning prisoner in the barrows or a demon seeking power over the world, Illidan Stormrage would forever be burned into Maiev's very soul. Drawing the last dagger, Maiev lunged under a branch. Alighting onto a lower one, she brought her hand back for throwing, then spun around to face the intruder she had felt coming up behind her. At the same time Maiev tossed the dagger up, catching it by the hilt as it came down. The tip ended up touching the throat of another female. To her credit, the newcomer flinched only slightly. Maiev nodded her approval; Neva was her best student. "Forgive this interruption," Neva said calmly, eyes never going to the hand
that held the dagger under her chin. "I would not have disobeyed your command if it were not important." Maiev removed the dagger. "I trust your judgment. You know me better than anyone." This straightforward comment elicited a brief but odd look from Neva. Maiev's brow arched. "Why are you here?" "I was crossing through from the Temple Gardens when I saw the gathering. The archdruid Malfurion Stormrage was there." "Was he?" Maiev's memories coursed back to much younger days, when she had been a senior priestess of Elune. There again she saw Illidan Stormrage, though as a younger, handsome, but haughty figure, next to his twin brother, the future archdruid. "Yes . . . the archdruid had evidently arrived just a moment before I had. He stood only a few feet from where I did. He was staring at a male in a travel cloak. The male was carrying another, a female. She looked to be dying. . . ." "Get to the point." The other female gave a slight nod. "The archdruid recognized the male. He whispered the name, which I was just barely able to hear." Neva hesitated, then concluded, "It was your brother's name." Maiev revealed no reaction. She simply stood there as still as a statue. After several seconds, she finally blinked; then, with deft ease, she spun and threw the blade at the final target. The strike was perfect. "Jarod . . . ," Maiev muttered. "I am not mistaken, Warden." "I did not think you were. So my brother has come back." Neva bowed her head. "I had thought him long dead." "We were both mistaken, then." Maiev retrieved her helmet. "He will be in or near the temple-probably in it." "You are going to visit him?" "Not at the moment. I need to think-" Maiev suddenly paused. Her eyes swept over the trees to the region to her right. Neva followed her gaze but saw nothing. "Never mind," Maiev ordered her companion as the senior Watcher put the helmet on. "Let us go. I must see my dear long-lost sibling." "But you said you were not going to visit-"
Jarod's sister looked at her companion with narrowed eyes. "I said I must see him." Neva nodded her understanding. Without another word, Maiev bounded down through the branches toward Darnassus. The younger night elf leapt after. Despite millennia separating their ages, Neva found herself hard-pressed to keep up with her instructor.
He watched the night elves leap gracefully out of sight, moving with an inborn skill that few other races could match but which made him sniff in contempt. He had not meant to cross their path, but perhaps it had been for the best. While the news of which they had spoken did not outwardly seem of import, anything that in the least concerned Archdruid Malfurion Stormrage would be of interest to his own master. Information was always valuable, especially in these times.
With a slight growl, the figure leapt in the opposite direction. He moved through the foliage with as much skill and grace as the slimmer but taller night elves had. Perhaps more, even. After all, they did not have long, long claws with which to better grasp a tree branch . . . or rend a foe, when necessary.
4
THE MESSAGE FROM ASHENVALE
Haldrissa had returned to her headquarters after her inspection of the outposts with more than the loss of her eye causing her frustration. While all of the outposts had proven to be in top condition, some of the activity reports that she had received from the officers in charge did not settle well with her. Where in several places there should have been some nominal orc activity, nearly all had reported nothing whatsoever. And where there had generally been no activity, odd little occurrences-though nothing as drastic as what she and her retinue had encountered-had taken place. Reports of a few footprints here, a broken arrow with Horde markings found there, a vanishing of game in another location . . . by themselves they were hardly anything to think about, but, when all were added together, they hinted at some growing trouble. The commander sat cross-legged on a woven grass mat in her quarters. To her right, a toppled mug and a small, drying pool of water marked an earlier, failed attempt to adjust to perception problems due to her impaired vision. Haldrissa was doing better now, but still there were moments when her fingers had to hesitate before she was certain she was reaching for a parchment correctly. She stared at the array of reports from the various outposts, her remaining eye darting from one to the next. However, as Haldrissa looked at one to her farthest left, she suddenly realized that Denea stood waiting there. Just for a brief moment Haldrissa noted what she knew to be impatience on her second's part. That emotion quickly melted away, leaving only the steady expression of a Sentinel lieutenant. How long Denea had been waiting, Haldrissa could not say. The
commander tried not to think of what would have happened if it had been the middle of combat and, rather than Denea, it had been an orc standing in her blind spot. Haldrissa revealed no frustration with either her lapse or her second's impatience as she rose to meet Denea's eye. "What is it?" "You sent for me." Haldrissa had, but it had slipped her mind. Simply nodding, she said, "I have gone over all the reports. I believe it urgent we send warning to Darnassus. The orc incursion near the one outpost was the most intrusive, but by far not the only one." "They have pushed into the area before. You think this incident that important?" "Important enough to send a message to General Shandris immediately. Have a hippogryph rider ready within a quarter hour." Denea saluted and left. Haldrissa looked over the reports one last time; then, taking quill to parchment, she wrote all she felt pertinent and how in her opinion it tied together. By the time she was done, Denea had returned. "The rider is ready. I chose Aradria Cloudflyer." The commander nodded her approval. Aradria was an expert rider, perhaps the best in all Ashenvale. Sealing the parchment into a small pouch, Haldrissa again rose. With Denea a step behind her, she strode to where the courier already waited upon a huge forest-green animal with the clawed forelegs and crested head of a bird of prey -a head also adorned with long, wicked antlers-and a body otherwise like the sleekest of stags. His wings were a brilliant orange, like a setting sun. The hippogryph's eyes radiated fierce intelligence. These creatures were not property or pets but rather allies. Riders did not control so much as work in concert with them. Aradria leaned down as the commander stepped close. She was even more wiry than Denea. On the other side of the saddle were strapped her glaive and a quiver full of arrows. Her bow was looped over her head and shoulder. "No one sees this but the general," Haldrissa ordered as she handed the pouch to the courier. "None shall," Aradria promised. She saluted Haldrissa as she straightened. The courier thrust the pouch into a larger one attached to the curved saddle on
which she sat. "Fly with all haste," the commander continued. "Beware the sea." "Windstorm is the fastest we have here." Aradria patted the hippogryph on the neck. The winged creature nodded, his eyes gleaming in anticipation. "No one will catch him." With that promise, she urged the magnificent mount to flight. The others stepped back as Windstorm spread his broad wings and readily rose into the air. Watching the pair, Haldrissa felt a pang of jealousy. As commander, she rarely had the opportunity to ride such a mount. "I want to double the patrols, Denea," she said once the courier and the hippogryph had become a blur. "Daytime and night. Especially night." "The orcs would be better off trying to infiltrate during the day," Denea pointed out, indicating the time when most of the night elves still slept. "Which is why we need to pay special attention when it is night." Her second did not contest her judgment. Haldrissa dismissed Denea, then returned to her quarters. They were sparse, little more than the mat and the necessary tools needed for her reports and such. Another woven mat, this one longer and thicker, served as her bed. Unlike some officers, Haldrissa did not pamper herself. She slept as her soldiers slept. It will not take her long, the senior officer thought. It will not take Aradria long to reach Darnassus, not by air. She was glad about that. General Shandris would see her concerns and move to address them. Still, Haldrissa realized that there was yet need to build up the outposts beyond their current strength. As the weary commander lay down on her sleeping mat, she began calculating how to best rearrange her present level of troops. That further calmed her. Between her missive to the general and her own plans, the Horde was surely in for a dire surprise should it be planning a new attack. The orcs were nothing if not predictable in their overall methods. Satisfied and eager to let rest ease some of the pain returning to her eye, Haldrissa finally slumbered. Ashenvale would soon be secure again. . . .
The courier grinned as she and the hippogryph soared above the trees. Already deep into night elf territory, they both knew that they could save time skimming above the forest. Aradria had promised Haldrissa that they would get the report to Darnassus as swiftly as possible, and she and Windstorm had every
intention of fulfilling that promise. Besides, they had a reputation to keep among the other riders and mounts.
The hippogryph's powerful wings beat hard. The miles vanished behind them. Aradria left it to her companion to judge where and when he would need to rest; experienced riders never assumed that they knew better than the hippogryphs themselves. The cool wind felt bracing to the night elf, and she knew that it touched Windstorm the same way. Peering at the landscape below, Aradria made a judgment call as to a change in direction that might cut down their time even more. She tapped the hippogryph on the left side of his broad, muscular neck, using a short series of touches to communicate what she thought. Such a method was far better than trying to shout against the wind. Without warning, the hippogryph rocked violently, his wings flapping in an awkward, jolting manner. As she clutched tight, the night elf glanced at one of the wings. Two thick bolts had pierced it, right near the muscle. Blood stained the brilliant plumage and also sprinkled the treetops below. Aradria looked at the other wing. There, a third bolt had likewise punctured the appendage, and more blood streaked across not only the feathers but the sky behind. The shots were expert, so much so that the wounds kept the hippogryph from maintaining altitude. Windstorm's talons and hooves raked against the trees as he struggled to stay aloft. Torn leaves and bits of branches assailed the courier as the mount's battle against descent faltered more and more with each passing second. "Ungh!" A stray branch as big as her arm hit the night elf in the chest. Aradria lost her breath, then her balance. She fell back. Windstorm crashed among the trees. The collision was the final straw for the Sentinel, who tumbled off the saddle. If not for the thickness of the forest canopy here, Aradria would have been dead. As it was, she slammed through one heavy branch after another, until the accumulation of debris falling with her created a barrier that put an end to her fall. She lay there, stunned, with her head and left arm hanging down. The wounded hippogryph became tangled in a mass of trees just a short distance ahead. Instinct overwhelming thought, Windstorm twisted and turned
in an attempt to free himself. The saddle, caught on some of the branches, held him fast for a moment, until brute fury enabled the mount to rip free of it. The saddle dropped several yards farther down the tree. Aradria heard the hippogryph's frustration and caught glimpses of his struggles as she pulled herself up to a sitting position. From her shoulder she removed the bow, broken in the fall. Scratched, bleeding, and with one smaller finger bent at an unlikely angle, the night elf nonetheless thought only about her companion and the pouch. Pausing just to reset the finger in order to better her grip, she moved nimbly toward Windstorm. She had barely begun when the hippogryph, still turned awkwardly despite having freed himself from the saddle, broke through the stressed limbs holding him. The massive beast let out a squawk as he violently descended through one level of branches after another, finally vanishing from Aradria's sight. Her desperate gaze fixed on the saddle some distance below. Though she still wanted to help the hippogryph, Aradria knew that her duty was to retrieve the pouch. With one last glance in search of Windstorm, the night elf leapt toward the saddle. The branches held her, but barely. Even those not directly near where the hippogryph had crashed had been damaged by the falling limbs. Aradria made a swift calculation as to which would best suit her, then jumped to it. She landed just a few scant yards from the saddle. Only then did she see that the larger pouch was empty. The small one containing the missive now lay somewhere farther below, perhaps even on the ground. Aradria retrieved her glaive, slinging it on her gauntlet. After a moment's consideration, the Sentinel also took the quiver of arrows along. From far below came Windstorm's angry cry. The night elf began leaping down from branch to branch. At last she spotted a patch of ground . . . and the pouch. "Praise Elune!" Aradria murmured. Ignoring the pain in her finger, she grasped another branch and descended farther. An arrow shot past her ear. She did not see the archer but estimated his position from the bolt's flight. Aradria whipped the glaive free and threw it. It cut through the remaining foliage and briefly vanished from sight. A gruff voice roared in agony. Seconds later the glaive returned to the night
elf's waiting hand. The blades were stained with fresh blood. Taking a deep breath, the courier dropped the last distance. She could still see the pouch. It leaned against the trunk of the very tree from which she had just descended. Aradria reached for it- From around the trunk burst a tusked orc, his huge axe already raised high to cleave the night elf in two. His thick mane of hair, bound tight, swung wildly as he ran at her, and the grin spread across his wide face revealed that, while he still had tusks, several of his other teeth had been broken in past conflicts. The damage did more to enhance his already fearsome appearance. The courier brought up the glaive just in time to deflect the strike. Her entire arm vibrated from the force of the muscular orc's blow. Aradria gritted her teeth as she fought not to cede her position near the pouch. The grinning orc slashed away at her again. Every bone in the already injured night elf's body screamed, yet she held her place. Still, she knew that the impasse could not last: more orcs would surely join the fight. When her foe raised his axe for his next swing, Aradria retreated a step. The orc's grin widened as he took this action as evidence that the duel was tilting more in his favor. Aradria threw the glaive with all her might. The distance was not much, but her determined effort gave the triple-bladed weapon the force it needed. One curved blade buried itself deep in the orc's chest. The green-skinned warrior stumbled. Although he was not dead, the wound was a grave one. With his free hand, he tried to pull the glaive free. The night elf barreled into him, pressing the glaive deeper as her opponent staggered back. At the same time she reached up to the quiver and grabbed one of the shafts. Aradria shoved the arrow through the orc's throat. The orc let out a gurgling sound. Despite dying, he clutched the night elf tight. The two fell to the ground. She struggled to free herself. Not far off, she heard movement that did not sound like a forest creature. Anticipating more orcs, the courier finally managed to shove the body away. Unfortunately, she could not immediately free the glaive. A rustling of brush made her look over her left shoulder in time to see three more orcs racing toward her from behind the nearby trees. Aradria tugged hard,
the glaive finally coming out with a grotesque slurping sound. She whirled to face the trio, already aware that she had little chance against them. Then . . . two more orcs stepped into the area from the opposite direction, cutting off what little hope she had of still fleeing with the pouch. Aradria surreptitiously glanced at the object. There was still a chance to at least destroy the contents if she could buy herself a few moments. With a brief murmured oath to Elune, the night elf charged the nearest three. Her audacity served her well: the orcs hesitated, all but certain that she had intended to go against the pair. Aradria threw the glaive as she lunged. The spinning missile forced the trio to scatter. The glaive soared past the orcs, then arced back, but not to the night elf's previous position. Rather, both it and she converged on the location where the pouch lay. But she had underestimated the swiftness of at least one of the other two orcs. Even as Aradria caught the glaive, he reached the pouch. Clutching the prize in one hand, the brutish warrior turned to battle her. The courier swung the glaive at him, then suddenly kicked. Although the orc outweighed her, the force was still enough to shove the air from his lungs. Aradria pressed her attack, hoping to take him down and retrieve the pouch. Much to her dismay, the other nearby orc came between them. His intrusion enabled his comrade to recover, and both dueled with the tiring night elf. Aradria knew that the other three had to be closing. She was trapped. Suddenly a deep squawk shook the combatants. A huge form shot past the night elf. Mighty talons tore through the torso of one orc. Though bleeding in many places and clearly favoring one front leg, Windstorm was yet a tremendous threat. The orcs could not get past his sharp beak. His body blocked them from reaching Aradria. The night elf used his timely entrance to beat back her other two adversaries. She then took a quick look at the hippogryph, trying to estimate his condition. Windstorm could not fly-that was clear from his one badly drooping wing- but perhaps he could still carry her from the struggle. First, though, she needed the pouch. "Windstorm!" As the hippogryph responded, Aradria gestured at the orc with the stolen prize. The huge beast might not be able to fly, but he could leap very well. Using his talons, he scattered the two orcs near him, then turned and made a tremendous
jump over Aradria. The other orcs backed away at his landing. Windstorm ignored the one without the pouch. The hippogryph snapped at the key warrior, but that orc refused to give up the pouch even in the face of such a threat. At the same time Aradria moved up, hoping to attack the orc while he was distracted by Windstorm. Windstorm thrust his head forward, his beak opened wide. A spear caught the hippogryph in the side of the chest. Windstorm let out a startled cry and teetered. In doing so, he collided with his rider, bowling her over. The world spun as Aradria rolled. A horrific pain shot through her chest. She almost blacked out. A nerve-wrenching keening cut briefly through the agony. Aradria heard a moist thwacking sound, then Windstorm's shriek. A moment later the ground shook as something heavy and limp crashed next to her. The pain consumed her . . . until finally there was nothing left.
One of the orcs with whom Aradria had been battling started to lean over the night elf's still form. Blood seeped from a deep wound near the courier's left lung, where one of the curved blades from her glaive had pierced her during her roll.
"Why bother?" another orc questioned. "The wound's deep. She can't be alive." "If she is," rumbled a deeper voice, "she deserves a warrior's death for such determination against impossible odds." A shadow passed the second orc, the shadow of a much brawnier warrior than he. One hand-brown rather than green-gripped an axe more suited for two hands in combat. The sharply curved axe head was massive, well worn, and permanently stained with old blood. One of its most distinctive features was the many small holes in the head near the handle. Other orcs gathered in the area, their numbers totaling just over a dozen. Three bore injuries that indicated a previous encounter with the hippogryph. The warrior who had retrieved the pouch presented it to the leader. "I saw no breathing. She is dead. This was what she fought so hard for, great warchief. . . ."
The leader hooked the huge axe on his back, then took the pouch. Because he was a Mag'har orc, his skin was brown, not green. His jaw was broader than that of most orcs, and from it jutted a pair of thick tusks with points as sharp as daggers. Unlike the others in the party, he was bald. He wore shoulder armor fashioned in part from the skull of a huge predator that he himself had slain, and over each shoulder had also been set a massive, curved tusk. The last was in homage to his father, Grom, for they were those of the pit lord Mannoroth, the great demon his sire had slain. By killing Mannoroth, Grom had freed his people from the fiend's blood-curse, which had made them servants of the monstrous Burning Legion. Tearing open the small pouch with ease, he read the message. A single, satisfied grunt was his only initial reaction. "The spirits have guided us. We were where we needed to be to catch this prey." He crammed the parchment into a pouch at his belt. "Destiny is with us. All falls into place. The night elves react exactly as I said they would." "Garrosh Hellscream knows all!" declared the orc who had handed him the pouch. "He guides his enemies to their doom and laughs at their feeble attempts to keep their necks from his mighty axe, Gorehowl!" "Gorehowl will taste much night elf blood soon. The Horde's glory is eternal," Garrosh replied, his tone filled with rising anticipation. "This is our land now. . . . " He looked around. "So much timber. So much untouched ore. The Alliance was foolish not to use its bounty. We-we will build a city here to rival even Orgrimmar." The other orcs gave a lusty though low cheer. Although in the wilderness, they could still not trust that there might not be others who would hear them. None of the orcs feared battle, but this mission was of the greatest import to the plan, or else the warchief himself would not have chosen to lead it. The courier had been an exception: the scout who had spotted her in the distance had suspected from her route and pace that she surely carried something of importance, and had reported the sighting immediately. Garrosh had not hesitated for a moment before ordering his archers to bring down the hippogryph. "I have seen all I need. We return now. The ships will soon arrive." He grinned, already envisioning the carnage their contents would create. "My gift to the Alliance must be readied. . . ."
The rest of the band let loose with another low cheer. Garrosh pulled free Gorehowl and briefly waved it. The unsettling keening arose once more, then quieted as the warchief lowered his axe. Gripping the weapon in both hands, he then led his followers east. Behind them, Aradria stirred, let out a brief moan . . . then grew still once more.
5
BITTER REUNIONS
True to her promise, the high priestess arranged matters for Jarod Shadowsong. Shalasyr lay at rest in the temple in an area reserved for such sad tableaux, her body now garbed in the raiment of the Sisterhood. She had been placed on a marble platform with the sign of the goddess-the crescent moon- etched multiple times into each side. The light of Elune shone down upon her, and her face bore an expression of peace. Those who had known her came to give their respects, each going down on one knee, then murmuring a prayer for her spirit to the Mother Moon. The temple never closed its doors to the faithful, although most of those coming to honor Shalasyr came during the evening. However, time meant nothing to Jarod, who ever leaned over his beloved, either praying to Elune or silently speaking to his mate. The travel cloak lay bunched up to the side, but otherwise he was clad in the same forest-green and brown garments in which he had arrived. His beard and hair were slightly unkempt; such mundane matters were of no interest to him at this time. Generally, there were two priestesses in attendance for such occasions, but at the former captain's request Tyrande had removed them. Although grateful for all that had been done for his mate, Jarod desired privacy when no other mourners were present. Head resting upon his folded hands, he spoke again to Shalasyr, this time reminding her of when they had built their first dwelling together. It had been a simple one, designed to give them shelter while they made plans for something more permanent. The mistakes they had made in its creation had done more to bind them together.
Jarod looked up, well-honed instincts alerting him to the presence of another. He glanced over his shoulder at the entrance. "My respects for your loss," Shandris quietly said. "The Mother Moon guides her spirit now." The general of the Sentinels moved as smoothly as a nightsaber and, to Jarod, seemed much unchanged physically from when they had last met. She carried her helmet in the crook of her arm, which allowed him to study close her face. As usual, Shandris's true emotions remained hidden, save for a brief flash of what he read as either anger or uncertainty. Shandris had been adopted by Tyrande, but they looked enough alike in the face to have passed for true mother and child. However, the high priestess had a softness to her expression that Jarod had seldom seen on Shandris. The general was also clad very true to her nature, her sleek, violet armor covering most of her form. The armor had been designed as much for swift movement as protection; even the shoulderguards were set so that Shandris could raise a bow or sword at a moment's notice without any hindrance. The helmet-which only covered the upper half of the face-had also been forged with those two thoughts in mind. It could be easily set atop or pulled off of the head without ever catching on the long, tapering ears of a night elf or, in Shandris's case, tangling with her long, dark blue hair. "Thank you." As she strode toward him, Jarod straightened to better face her. Her somber expression matched well his own. "I recall her," the general continued, looking at the still figure. "She had much merit." "She had life. She breathed life. The world brightened wherever she went." Shandris turned more toward the body, in the process her expression becoming hidden from Jarod's view. "You truly loved her." "Of course." "Then I envy her." He gaped. "Shandris-" The female night elf looked back at him. Her eyes were moist, but the tears were clearly not entirely for the deceased. "I am sorry. I have been rude. You know that you have my deepest sympathies. To lose her so suddenly after so long . . . it is not right." "Shandris . . ."
"I must go," she muttered, looking even more uncomfortable than Jarod felt. He tried to gently take her arm, but Shandris evaded his touch without seeming to try. She could not keep him from following her, though, and thus the two walked in silence out of the chamber. Jarod looked around, saw that no one was near, then quietly said, "I have owed you an apology for a long time-" "You owe me no such thing. Nothing ever truly happened between us." He looked back at the chamber, his face radiating guilt. Then: "I do not deny I was enchanted by your attention, especially once you had grown up, but we were heading in opposite directions in life. Those years right after the war were hard on all of us. All I wanted was to try to forget the carnage and the deaths. I never wanted to be a leader . . . a hero. . . . " Jarod said the last word with much self-derision. "I felt out of place, something you did not. You had purpose. You had your duty to the temple and the high priestess." "She has-" Jarod held up a hand for silence, and, clearly to his surprise, Shandris obeyed. "That you would be devoted to Tyrande not only for saving your life but for becoming the mother you lost is hardly something with which I would find fault. Yet she . . . and through her, our people . . . have been and always will be your foremost focus." Shandris opened her mouth, then shut it. There was no denial in her eyes. Instead, she leaned up and suddenly kissed him on the cheek. There was not even the mildest attempt at seduction; this was a token of sympathy for his plight. "I am here if you need to talk," the general said. With that, she turned and departed. Shandris did not look back, and Jarod did not say farewell. He only watched as she headed in the direction that he knew the high priestess's sanctum lay. The former officer started back, only to notice another armored figure far off in the opposite direction. "Mother Moon!" Jarod whispered, thinking that he recognized the other despite the helmet. He waved to her. Yet, unlike Shandris, the newcomer, once noticed, did not approach. Rather, she turned to leave. "Maiev!" If she heard him, she did not respond. He stood there for a
moment, completely perplexed, then rushed after his sister. She had gone around a corner before he had managed half the distance. Certain that he would lose her and not sure when they would meet next, Jarod ran. He cut around the corner, only to see his quarry vanish out of the temple. Following suit, Jarod exited onto the long bridge leading to the gardens. By that time, Maiev-if it was her-was already across the bridge and well into the area. He rushed through the gardens after her; then, beyond them, he twisted east as the ever half-glimpsed figure of his sister moved swiftly through the city and beyond the boundaries of Darnassus into the forest. Jarod was not far behind, but still too far for his tastes. As he entered among the trees, he wondered if this would all prove a futile chase. Still, he was determined to follow. Jarod darted among the first trees, trying to estimate the right path. He caught one glimpse of what he thought was an arm just noticeable between the tree trunks to his right and immediately veered toward it. Although he had no knowledge of this forest, Jarod allowed his natural instincts to guide him. He made swift judgments about the most accessible routes and where, from what he could make out of the landscape ahead, Maiev would likely head. Although he could not see her, he was certain that he was at last closing on her. A sudden rush of intense satisfaction at this vied with his guilt for having left Shalasyr's side. He was not going to let Maiev get the best of- A muzzle full of long, sharp teeth confronted him. The image that filled Jarod's view over the next few seconds was one of nightmare. He saw something lupine . . . yet roughly humanoid in shape. It was at least as tall as he was, but nearly twice as wide and far more muscled. Long, deadly claws flashed by his face but did not touch him. The eyes- The eyes were those of no beast. A powerful fist thrust against Jarod's chest, shoving the air from his lungs. The night elf bent over as he struggled for breath. In the back of his mind he waited for the killing strike, by either claw or bite. But the strike did not come, and when Jarod managed to lift his head enough to see before him, it was to discover that he was again alone. The only hint that anything had stood before him was the already slowing shift of branches. Jarod darted after the unseen creature. He ducked around another tree- -and then nearly ran into his sister, Maiev, who suddenly stood right in
front of him. She had removed her helmet, revealing deep scars across her face that startled Jarod as much as her sudden presence in front of him. "Never go chasing someone alone in unfamiliar territory. I thought that was one of the first things I taught you." Jarod looked down to see the point of her umbra crescent touching his chest. He had noted the weapon at her side when he first spotted her, but had never expected to have it wielded against him. Chuckling at his discomfort, Maiev withdrew the weapon. In one smooth movement she hooked it at her side again. "I thought that, of all people, I could trust in my sister." "Perhaps more than a scorned love," she returned. "That was General Shandris Feathermoon I saw retreating in defeat in the temple, was it not?" "Maiev . . ." "She was quite in a shambles when you vanished so long ago-" "Enough, Maiev!" His joy at reuniting with his sister quickly became tempered by her comments about Shandris. Still, he tried to regain his initial enthusiasm. After all, it had been so long. . . . "It is so good to see you again! I wondered if we might meet when I returned here. I had hoped so." "Why?" Her question put him off balance. "You are my sister! My only flesh and blood! We have not seen each other in millennia!" "And whose fault is that?" she snapped without warning. "Maiev-" Suddenly, Jarod faced a person whose expression was filled with anger, with bitterness. This was not the reunion for which he had hoped. Maiev shook her head at his obvious naïveté. "Did you think I would forget even after all this time? You shamed us! You were one of the leaders of our people! I was quite proud of you then. My little brother, commander of the night elf host! I watched you grow during the war, taking over after the death of that aristocratic imbecile, Stareye, and proving to everyone that the name Shadowsong should be respected by all!" "You do not understand-" "You never will, it seems. You apparently never understood duty and loyalty -" She hesitated when she noticed something on his face. Only then did Jarod feel the moistness running down his left cheek and the stinging near his eye. He
touched his hand to the moisture, then looked at his fingers. Blood. Jarod could not recall when it had happened, but assumed that it must have been during his encounter with the mysterious creature. Yet, he did not remember the beast scratching him there. "That got dangerously close to your eye," his sister commented, with a surprising hint of softness in her tone. She put a finger to the stinging area. "Did you fall or slip on the path? I remember you being better skilled on the hunt than that." It only occurred then to Jarod that he had not yet had a chance to tell her about the startling confrontation. "Maiev! There was something here in the forest with us! Something I have never seen before anywhere. I ran into it just before I caught up with you! It could still be nearby-" Her mockery died away, and Maiev the warrior took over. "Did it do that to you? What did it look like?" "No . . . the scratch I must have gotten from a tree branch after I collided with the creature. It did not attack me!" Jarod collected his thoughts. "I did not get a good look. It happened so quickly. Something lupine . . . I think! All I saw were claws, teeth, and a shape not unlike our own, but wider. . . ." "Oh." Maiev no longer looked interested. "One of them. There is nothing to fear there. They do not dare get on the high priestess's or Archdruid Malfurion's bad side." He could not believe that what he had seen could be so easily dismissed. "'Them'? There are more like that? Roaming around Darnassus's boundaries?" "Forget it, Brother. It fled, did it not? That tells you all you need to know. They are cowardly skulkers with no bite! The worgen are undesirables who could not even save their own home." "What are-" But before Jarod could finish, Maiev had begun to move on. She did not head directly toward Darnassus, but rather took a path that would make her skirt the east side of the capital. Jarod had to rush to keep up. "Do as I say and forget them," she repeated. "Besides, it is certainly not your duty to police the capital. You gave up any sense of duty millennia ago." The barb hit true. Jarod grimaced but sought to defend himself. "Maiev, I gave our people centuries of dedication to duty, of devotion to-" "Centuries of dedication?" she laughed in his face. "That is nothing! Jarod, I have remained true to my duties as a protector of the night elf race from the
moment I became a priestess of Elune, and afterward as a Watcher, until even now! I volunteered to oversee the imprisonment of Illidan Stormrage, even though that meant my fate was locked for millennia with his! I pursued him when other misfortunes enabled his escape! I survived torture as his prisoner and finally had the chance to do what should have been done in the very beginning . . . slay the archdruid's accursed twin!" "Maiev!" She waved off the hand he reached to her. "Spare me any sympathy! I chose duty where you did not. Sometimes that has meant that I have made decisions that to others were not always evident as the right ones until much later, but I regret none of them." "I understand. You have ever been determined to do what was best for all, regardless of how it made you look at times. I have always admired that steadfastness in you." The muscles in his sister's face grew a little less taut. A hint of weariness touched her gaze. "I do what I must do." This time he would not brook her blocking his hand. He put a hand on her shoulder and wished that the armor would not prevent him from gently squeezing Maiev there. "I have missed you. Of all those I left behind, I missed you the most." "The general would not enjoy hearing that." "Do not joke with me about that. Not now." She patted him on the arm. "My mistake. You have had a terrible loss. I recall Shalasyr. Well skilled in the martial arts training of the Sisterhood. She would have made a good Watcher." He grew uncomfortable. "I need to return. I am sorry, Maiev. Later-" "Yes. Later we will talk more. Be off with you. My condolences." Jarod hesitated, then turned. However, a nagging guilt at leaving matters so unfinished made him almost immediately look back. Maiev was gone. The former guard officer nearly called out, then hesitated. Brow furrowed, he eyed where his sister had stood, then resumed his journey back to Darnassus and his Shalasyr.
In another part of the forest near Darnassus, others had gathered. They were
clad much more elegantly than other night elves and bore about them an inherent air of superiority. Their sleek robes were flamboyant and brilliantly colored.
Although clearly night elves, these were the Highborne, the highest caste of old night elf nobility. However, due to their continued use of arcane magic, they had been shunned by their brethren following the War of the Ancients. Once, there had been many more of them, but some had fallen serving their arrogant and evil queen, Azshara, while others had been later transformed in other manners, turned into the reptilian, sea-dwelling fiends called naga. Refugees from Eldre'Thalas-better known to most in this age by the more apt title Dire Maul-these night elf magi and their fellow survivors remained shunned by many of those in Darnassus. Though the Highborne even now maintained an air of absolute independence, in truth they found themselves in need of others. However, that by no means meant any lacking in arrogance or in their desire to continue their study of the arcane, no matter what the cost. There were twenty at this gathering, twenty of the strongest. Var'dyn Skyseeker was leader of the twenty and had aspirations to be much more: the eventual successor to the Highborne's speaker, Archmage Mordent Evenshade. Var'dyn now guided the spell that the twenty cast, a test of their power. The swirling energies gathered within the circle the casters formed. The faces of each male and female in the group glowed from not only the radiance but also his or her deep enthrallment. Var'dyn gestured, and the energies came together in one powerful yet compact sphere. He gestured again, and tendrils reached out in the four directions of the compass. We are now ready, he told the others through the link that their spellwork created. As one, the Highborne drew a sign in the air. The tendrils grew stronger, and more erupted from the sphere. The sphere itself pulsated rapidly- A horrific wind tore through the region. Highborne cried out in surprise as they were buffeted. The circle broke, but Var'dyn kept the link solid. They had come this far with their efforts; he was not about to let them all fail. Then, what at first some mistook for thunder roiled through the area. Var'dyn looked up, but there were no clouds. He stared at the treetops, which
shook violently . . . more violently than the wind demanded. It was they, in fact, that were the source of the deafening roar. "Keep to your efforts!" Var'dyn snapped at some of his companions, the clearly unnatural actions of the forest finally unnerving them enough to cause risk to the spell. He led the way, concentrating harder and trying to draw the others back into the effort. A tremendous wrenching drowned out the roar. One of the nearest trees bent down. Its limbs now acted like so many tentacles from some kraken. They reached for those Highborne below them. More wrenching arose from beyond the boundaries of the gathering. Everywhere, the closest trees stretched their branches toward the spellcasters. The link weakened beyond Var'dyn's will to keep it intact. The gathered energies faded, and the tendrils dissipated. The sphere shrank-and then melted away with a pitiful hiss. As it vanished, many of the exhausted Highborne slumped to the ground. Var'dyn remained standing, although it was secretly an effort to do so. Gritting his teeth, he searched the forest for the cause of the disaster. "I made matters very clear regarding the practice of your arcane arts!" boomed a voice from every direction. "This goes against everything upon which the archmage and I agreed!" One of the other spellcasters thrust a finger toward Var'dyn's left. There, the branches and underbrush gave way of their own accord to open a path to a lone figure wielding only a staff. "Archdruid . . ." Var'dyn did not bow to Malfurion Stormrage, though he did nod his head in respect. "I have petitioned over and over about some mild changes in our agreement, but received no suitable answer. We need more leeway in our efforts; our powers will stagnate if we cannot utilize them in a sufficient manner-" Malfurion strode up to Var'dyn, then raised the staff slightly. Var'dyn wisely quieted. "Your petition is still under consideration by both Mordent and me-as you have been informed more than once-and there has been no answer on it for reasons you have already been told! The reputation of the Highborne will always be stained by their past. As the archmage's thero'shan, you should understand that. You Highborne chose to stay in Eldre'Thalas, defending and hiding in your special city as the war bloodily played out elsewhere."
"We fought for our home!" "You stood by while the queen's counselor, Xavius, oversaw the creation of the portal that let the Legion into our world; you stood silent when Queen Azshara chose the demons over her own people; and you continue your practice of arcane magic, even though it is the same magic that drew the Legion to us. Even the millennia have not stripped the people's memories of those final days. It was difficult enough even to gain your kind the right to come to Darnassus. . . ." "We came here thanks to your promises, Archdruid! We came here with the assurance that we were to be a part of night elf society again, yet also with the understanding that we will maintain our own identity too! However, as you yourself so eagerly point out, we are still ostracized! We must be able to openly practice our arts; otherwise, that alone proves your promises and those of the high priestess amount to nothing!" The archdruid stepped closer, only pausing when he and Var'dyn were within reach of one another. Malfurion's gold eyes gleamed sharply. Some of the Highborne's arrogance faltered. "There is every intention of the Highborne becoming a part of our society again, but such things cannot and will not happen overnight," Malfurion quietly but sternly replied. "This is a process that will have to play out over time . . . perhaps years. Patience is a virtue we must all nurture, Var'dyn. If we can, we will succeed. Mordent understands that." Var'dyn did not look convinced, but nodded. Malfurion turned to the rest of the assembled Highborne. "Go back to the others and tell them what I said. And tell them that the high priestess Tyrande and I keep our promises." The other spellcasters wasted no time in beginning their retreat. Even the Highborne greatly respected the power of the legendary archdruid. Only Var'dyn remained behind. "I mean no disrespect, Archdruid. I am simply seeking the best for my own." "Mordent and I are aware of what you seek." With that, Malfurion returned to the forest, not once looking back or speaking to Var'dyn. The mage eyed the archdruid's receding form, not stirring until Malfurion was long gone. A scowl spread across Var'dyn's handsome face. "We will be patient . . . to a point," he muttered. "Only to a point." Still scowling, the Highborne followed after his companions. Caught up in
his fury, he ignored his surroundings. To his kind, trees were just trees, the forest merely a gathering of trees. The undergrowth through which he pushed was only overgrown weeds that, if not for his hosts, he would have razed instantly in order to clear a proper path. The Highborne lived for their arcane arts; they were used to having the environment bow to them, not the other way around, as it was with those who had built Darnassus. Like many Highborne, Var'dyn respected only power. The archdruid and the high priestess were powerful; thus, Var'dyn bowed to them. The rest of Darnassus, however . . . The mage's foot shoved against something that momentarily caused him to stumble. Well used to the disorganized manner of the forest, Var'dyn kicked at the object without looking, then continued on through the underbrush. He had led his band out to this location due to its supposed remoteness, but otherwise had only contempt for it. He looked forward to returning to the relatively civilized settlement the Highborne had set up. And so the hand that Var'dyn had kicked, the hand of the dead Highborne who had been but recently one of his band, lay, with its owner, for the time undiscovered.
6
STORM AT SEA
The storm struck suddenly, battering the ten great ships mere days from port. It quickly became one of the worst storms the orc captain could ever recall. Thunder crashed and lightning continuously lit up the sky. The rain came down in torrents and the sea rocked. Briln roared orders to the crew, trying to keep the flagship under control. If it looked as if he could not maintain command during the storm, then the entire fleet risked slipping into chaos as other captains turned to their own initiative. With the cargo they were carrying, such a choice would spell even greater disaster. The ship leapt into the air as another huge wave rolled by. Briln gripped the rail as the vessel came down hard. Those who had never sailed the seas could not appreciate just how much like stone water could feel at such times. The entire ship shook, and the hull creaked ominously. A scream from above made the fleet captain force his gaze into the downpour. He looked just in time to see one of the mariners who had been working on some of the snarled rigging fall into the sea. Briln grunted but did not call for a rescue. In this storm, the hapless mariner was already dead. The orc officer was more interested in getting the rest of his crew and his ship-all the ships-to safety. Briln had sworn an oath to the warchief that he was capable of fulfilling this mission. A shout from one of the crew made the captain turn. The other orc pointed frantically toward one of the trailing vessels. Briln wiped the rain from his good eye and squinted. There was a glow rising from the ship in question. Fire. Such a blaze could have started by lightning. Yet, this fire already appeared
too spread out and was confined to the deck for the most part. Generally, lightning caught the sails, rigging, or masts. Thunder rumbled. Briln, caught up in the distant spectacle, all but ignored it . . . until it ended not by fading but rather by being accented by a ferocious and much-too-near roar. He spun around and ran to the opposing rail. There, crashing through another humongous wave, the second ship in the fleet rocked wildly about in a manner that was contrary to the currents and wind. Something was shaking the ship from within its very hold. The captain took up a spyglass that he always carried on him when aboard. Holding the copper tube, he focused it on the sister vessel, where oil lamps secured to the masts and other strategic areas gave enough illumination to reveal what was happening. The captain of the second ship, a gruff mariner personally promoted by Briln, had his crew arming themselves with sea lances. Near the aft, three other orcs were lighting torches using oiled rags. Hardy warriors, they nonetheless looked very, very anxious. Briln swore. He waved the spyglass in an attempt to get the attention of one of those aboard the other ship. No one noticed. The fire spreading over the more distant ship now made more sense. That crew had been trying to do the same as these mariners and had somehow lost control of the situation. Thinking of the previous vessel, Briln turned the spyglass toward it. To his shock, it was no longer in sight. Such a blaze should have still been evident . . . unless the ship had already sunk. Cursing, Briln looked to his first mate. "A signal lamp! Hurry!" But as he gave the order, the flagship shook as if it had struck a hard reef. Briln fell to the side. The first mate dropped to his knees. Another mariner dropped over the rail and into the voracious sea. Another thump rattled the deck. Briln struggled to rise. "The storm's woken all of them up! Forget the lamp! Have the sleep powder readied, and spread it both on some food and the points of four spears! I want that thing below quieted or we'll be in as bad a shape as those other vessels!" As the first mate and the others followed his orders, Briln returned his attention to the sister ship. Matters there were only worse. Why haven't they quieted the beast? he wondered.
A quick scan of the deck revealed the answer. Blackened wreckage marked the area where the barrel with the herb powder used to keep the beasts sedated had been kept secure. Rain by itself could not have touched the tarp-covered container tucked under the overhang of the door to the captain's cabin, but lightning could have-and had. The entire area had been blasted, and with it the only certain way to keep their savage cargo docile. The flagship's own thumping slowed. A desperate notion occurred to Briln. He raced over to the hold entrance just as the first mate emerged. The other orc looked exhausted but triumphant. "He was just wakin'! We caught him in time-" The captain cut him off. "Who's the best shot?" The first mate grinned. "That'd be me, Captain! You know that!" "We've got a good amount of the powder left! Can you shoot a couple of sacks over to her?" Briln gestured at the other ship. "They've lost all their supply!" "Aye!" Another roar echoed from the direction of the other ship. Briln brought up the spyglass. The orcs with the torches were racing toward the hold. There, several mariners with lances prepared to descend. The deck behind them erupted. A gasp escaped Briln. He had seen no lightning. What could have-? As the shattered planks settled, the answer revealed itself. The silhouette of a huge hand briefly rose above the ruined deck, then sank back down. As that happened, the ship rocked back and forth even more violently. Some of the crew hurried to the hole. As that happened, Briln's second returned. "Two pouches!" the other orc shouted over the storm. "Where?" "Somewhere on the deck where they'll see them! Just hurry!" "Aye!" The first mate bound one tiny sack to an arrow, then readied the latter for firing. Even in such a storm, a skilled orc archer could be certain of hitting his target more often than not. But before Briln's second could let loose, the other ship rocked even more wildly. Several of the crew, focused on the hole in the deck, suddenly went stumbling toward the rails. Two fell over, and one only saved himself by
grabbing hold at the last moment. The first mate shifted, trying to compensate. With the other orcs being flung this way and that, there was now more of a risk of shooting one of them. The second ship tilted again, nearly falling sideways due to the additional impetus of another wave. As the vessel righted, the archer finally fired. Briln let out a lusty roar. The arrow landed true, about a yard from the gaping hole. One of the crew noticed it and ran to retrieve the pouch. It was clear that he had a fairly good idea what the flagship had just sent over. "Quick! The other!" the captain commanded. One pouch likely had more than enough powder to quiet the beast, but a second would guarantee success. The first mate raised his bow- The side of the hull facing the flagship shattered. A fearsome hoofed leg shot out, then pulled back in. The rough sea turned the damaged ship, bringing the new gap to the water. The sea flooded into the fractured hold. "Forget the powder!" Briln roared. He needed to say no more. Abandoning the effort, the first mate rushed to give the order to heave toward the floundering vessel. A wave briefly righted the ship, but its cargo, obviously growing more enraged, lashed out once more. Planks splintered as the hoof kicked again. The hole nearly doubled in size. When the ship listed this time, there was no doubt of its imminent fate. With water rushing in, the Horde vessel quickly sank. Within moments, the deck was at sea level. Orcs leapt for the churning water, trying to reach the flagship. Several were immediately swept under by the waves and did not resurface. Wild roars escaped the hold. The gargantuan hands ripped away at what remained of the deck. Yet, for all the creature's brute strength, he could not climb free in time. The deck sank below the water. The sea shoved the ship farther from the rest of the fleet. One by one, the lanterns were doused, leaving only a silhouette of the ill-fated vessel. A final frustrated roar cut over the storm. The silhouette changed as something seemed to erupt from the sinking ship's deck. Briln grasped hold of the rail, the rescue attempt for the moment erased from
his thoughts as the fear of a new threat to his own ship occurred to him. He envisioned the titanic creature wending his way closer. . . . But with one last huge bubble of escaping air, the floundering ship went completely under. The last plunge happened so swiftly that the beast had no opportunity to react. The flagship drew near two of the survivors. Briln doubted more than a handful would make it, if even that many. He mourned their brave deaths . . . then considered what the night's events might mean. He had lost a fifth of his precious cargo. "Eight should do," the captain muttered. "Eight should surely do. . . ." But that was up to the warchief. That was up to Garrosh. Briln hoped for no more losses. Surely, if there were no more losses, then Garrosh would forgive him for this failure. But if the warchief did find fault with him, Briln asked only that the great orc leader let him see the crushing of the Alliance in Ashenvale. That would make the captain's own death worth it all. . . .
There is a change in us, Malfurion noted as he strode through Darnassus. And not one for the better. . . .
The archdruid knew exactly when this undesired shift in the mood of the night elves had happened, and what had caused it. Shalasyr. They cannot forget Shalasyr. . . . Night elves were used to death in battle or by accident. What they were not used to was the loss of a life due to infirmity tied to aging. Tyrande had spoken with Jarod and through him learned the extent of Shalasyr's troubles. The illness had not been the only trouble, only the final straw. Jarod and his mate had been suffering from a number of minor but increasingly consistent aches and pains that sounded all too familiar to Malfurion, whose shoulder suffered twinges even now. He eyed those nearest his path as he crossed the gardens. A dour atmosphere pervaded them. Malfurion could imagine their thoughts; each wondered not only if this was the fate awaiting them but also just how imminent it might be. And he was no better than they were. There was no escaping the inevitable, but through the use of the Sisterhood, Tyrande was already trying to stem the rising fear. She also looked to the
examples of the younger races-the humans, especially-for how to handle the aging and sickness. True, the humans, too, suffered great emotional distress from both, but they also had a resilience that in most cases salvaged them. At the moment, neither the archdruid nor his mate was certain that their own race as a whole would prove as equal to the tests. Malfurion forced the situation from his thoughts. He had to concentrate on the summit. Preparations had at last been finalized, and the arrivals of the representatives were close at hand. Malfurion now had to concern himself with the specifics of what he hoped would be accomplished. "Archdruid Malfurion Stormrage . . ." It was next to impossible to come upon the archdruid without his noticing, but the speaker had done just that. Fortunately, Malfurion was not one of tender nerve. He simply turned and, to no surprise, found himself gazing down slightly at a human. The man was in the prime of life, strong of jaw, and with narrow eyes. He was clad in loose, simple brown garments. Despite being unarmed, he bore a stance that marked him as a fighter. Malfurion knew him. "Eadrik." Eadrik bowed low, his long, brown-black hair falling forward. "My lord Genn Greymane hoped to have a word with you, if you've time this day." The archdruid's brow furrowed. "As a matter of fact, Eadrik, I should speak with him right now. Where is he?" The human straightened. "I left him near the Warrior's Terrace, by the path leading to our refuge." Eadrik grimaced. "To be frank, Archdruid, I think he hoped you might do as you suggest. He knows time is short." "Then lead me." As Eadrik obeyed, Malfurion saw how the presence of this one human distracted the night elves in the vicinity almost as much as their concern over their aging did . . . despite the fact that humans and other members of the Alliance had had access to Darnassus since its founding. It was clear that Eadrik was recognized as one of Genn's aides and, thus, also recognized for what else he was. For his part, the young human kept his gaze straight ahead, almost as if nothing else existed but the path. Malfurion knew that the truth was just the opposite; Eadrik was as uncomfortable as the citizens of Darnassus, if not more so.
Eadrik moved as silently as any night elf, no mean feat for a human. He said nothing as they exited the city, but Malfurion noted that he finally relaxed as they entered the forest. The archdruid found it fascinating that a human would be more relieved to be in the wilderness than in a city. As ever, the trees welcomed the night elf's presence. Branches gently swayed against the wind, and leaves rattled. To Eadrik, it was not noticeable. To Malfurion, it was a pleasure. He made a gesture that he knew the trees would sense, acknowledging their greetings. Then the welcome gave way to something else. In the language of the trees, Malfurion heard, He waits . . . he waits behind Three-Knob Growth. . . . All trees had names. Most were incomprehensible to even the archdruid. What the night elf heard was an approximate definition of what those names meant. Tree names were almost always physical descriptions of their characteristics, and no two trees to his knowledge had the same one. Malfurion knew Three-Knob Growth, one of the first to rise in this part of the forest . . . so the tree had proudly informed him upon their first encounter some weeks earlier. He turned toward it just as Genn Greymane stepped out. "Hail, King of Gilneas," the archdruid solemnly declared. "Gilneas . . . ," murmured the brawny, dour figure. Genn Greymane resembled a bear, albeit an aging one. No handsome man, he yet had a commanding presence and eyes still sharp and quick for a human of his more mature age. Unlike the night elf, Genn sported a much shorter, clipped beard. He stood taller than Eadrik, which brought him slightly nearer to the night elf in stature. "Gilneas . . . ," the king repeated. "In name only, Archdruid." "For now!" Eadrik piped up. "We shall see." Glancing at the other human, Genn added, "And why is the archdruid here? I asked you to see about an audience with him, not drag him to me-" Malfurion interjected before the misunderstanding could grow out of proportion. "I told your man to take me to you, Genn. Your request coincided with my need to talk with you. Following Eadrik back saved valuable time." "It's about the summit, Archdruid." "Of course. Gilneas is one of the most prominent reasons I sought to bring it to fruition. Your people's admission to the Alliance is-"
"Re-admission, you mean," the king growled with much bitterness. "After I was foolish enough to think that Gilneas was best served taking matters into its own hands." "Genn! The curse was something beyond your control! You could not have -" "It doesn't matter!" the lord of Gilneas growled, for the moment sounding more like an animal than a man. He leaned into the archdruid, and although Malfurion was still taller, to the night elf it seemed that their gazes met evenly. Genn seemed bigger, wilder. "It doesn't matter! We are and will always be cursed!" Malfurion fought to take command of the conversation again. "We wanted to speak to one another about the gathering. The first emissaries will be arriving tomorrow." Genn deflated. "Yes. The summit. They'll all have their chance to judge me for my foolish mistakes." "I have been in contact with several of them. They understand the necessities of the time. They understand that you regret all that happened. They also can appreciate what you and your people can offer." "And do they understand it's a double-edged sword they're offered, Archdruid?" The night elf extended a comforting hand to the human's shoulder. Genn accepted it without question. "You have gained far better control of it than you think. You offer nothing but advantage, Genn. At the very least, they will have to seriously consider that aspect." "Even Stormwind?" "I have no answer there," Malfurion admitted. "But I have great hope." The archdruid leaned closer. "He is coming. That was what I especially wanted to tell you." "Stormwind is coming?" blurted Eadrik. "My lord! That means-" "Exactly nothing," the king of Gilneas responded at first. Still, his eyes shone with hope of his own. "No . . . perhaps it means much . . . if he and I can set aside our differences. I know that I'm more than willing." "Varian Wrynn is a wise man," the archdruid pointed out. "Stormwind would not be what it is if he were not." Genn finally could not help smiling at the news. "As you say. This lightens
my heart! There is a chance, after all. If he's coming, he must be willing to let bygones be bygones. . . ." Malfurion pulled back. "I need to return to dealing with the summit. I merely wanted to assure you that there is every reason to believe that Gilneas will be accepted into the Alliance. I want your promise that you will attend as previously stated and be willing to show your humility as well as your strength." "I'll be doing my part, don't you doubt it, Archdruid." Genn offered his hand, which Malfurion shook. "There's my promise again on all we agreed to. If there's any hope of seeing our home again, it's to get through this summit." "And I promise again to see that everyone understands the import of this . . . even Stormwind." Genn Greymane signaled to Eadrik, who slipped into the forest. The lord of Gilneas gave Malfurion one last grateful nod. "I know you'll do all you can. It wouldn't have gotten this far without you, Archdruid." Genn gritted his teeth. "But from here on, you know it all lies in one man's hands." "He will come to see things as they must be for all our sakes." "I believe that, but let us pray to your Elune just the same. I'll take all the help we can get. . . . " With that, the king slipped into the forest. The archdruid stood there, momentarily caught up in his thoughts. His gaze fixed on the area into which Genn and Eadrik had departed. A large, dark shape momentarily arose among the underbrush, then disappeared among the trees again. It was tall enough to be a man . . . but was not. The sight, though expected, still jarred the night elf slightly. As he turned, he again silently swore to do everything he could to help the refugees from Gilneas, including ensure that they were welcomed back into the Alliance by everyone. After all, they might never even have been cursed if not for Malfurion.
7
INTO THE FOREST
Haldrissa expected no word yet from Darnassus, but that did not mean that she remained idle in the meantime. She did not trust that the orcs were not already on the move. Thus it was that the very next day she had led another party out to investigate an area near the foothills east of the night elven camp Maestra's Post. With her was Xanon, chosen for his sharp eyes. Denea had been left in command back at the fort, not something Haldrissa's second had been happy about. "As seniormost officer, it would behoove you to remain behind," Denea had even suggested in her most courteous manner. "Just in case of trouble in the wilderness." Her point had had merit, but at the time Haldrissa had not been able to get past the thought that perhaps Denea had believed herself more capable of facing the rigors of the journey and any encounters during it. Haldrissa had declined the officer's suggestion without hesitation. However, now, some time into the ride, the twinges Haldrissa felt made her occasionally wonder if she should have listened more. But all thought of that vanished as Xanon returned with two other Sentinels from scouting the territory up ahead. Haldrissa had purposely chosen an obscure area less likely to be of interest to the Horde for the very reason that the enemy might have played on that reasoning. The commander had survived so long by learning to try to think like the enemy, however repulsive that might be to her at times. She had to do her best to expect the unexpected. Of course, both Denea and Xanon had looked dubious when first informed where she intended to lead the party.
However, Xanon did not look so dubious now. In fact, his concerned expression made everyone who had been waiting-especially Haldrissa-sit straight and taut. "What is it?" she asked the moment he was near. "Best see," he gasped, still exerted from the swift ride back. "This way!" One brow raised at this curious reply, the commander waved the party to follow Xanon. The trained nightsabers leapt effortlessly and silently through the forest, dodging around trees and across uneven terrain with an agility that Haldrissa still admired after all these millennia. Each cat was in the prime of its life. For the first time the commander considered her previous mounts and the ends of their turbulent lives. While some nightsabers did perish in battle, more than a few had survived their last years crippled from previous injuries. It brought home again her own encroaching mortality. The night elves kept a wary eye out, though thus far there was no indication as to what Xanon and the other pair had sighted. The male Sentinel hunched low as he rode, a sign of just how determined he was to get his commander to wherever they needed to be as quickly as possible. That boded ill, in her mind. Then, deep into a dense part of the forest, amidst a small patch of winding hills, Xanon abruptly signaled for the party to slow to a trot. Haldrissa urged her mount alongside his, then leaned close. "What . . . ?" "Listen." She knew his ears were sharper than most, too, but, even taking that into account, the commander marveled that he heard anything. Even the nightsabers appeared not to notice anything out of the ordinary. "I do not-" Haldrissa began, then paused. There was a very faint sound from far ahead. An odd, unsettling sound. It even had a strange rhythm to it, the same beat over and over and over. "What is that?" one of the others murmured. "It sounds familiar. . . ." "I want to see more." Peering back at the party, she ordered, "The rest of you, keep back! Xanon and I will investigate from here on. If you are needed, we will try to signal." The rest of the Sentinels did not look pleased, but they obeyed. Xanon urged his nightsaber on, but at a much slower, more precise pace. Haldrissa made her mount match speed.
As they neared, Xanon readied his glaive. Haldrissa did the same. The buzzing now dominated. It was a harsh, painful noise and was accompanied by a cracking sound. That sound, at least, the commander knew. It was the sound of wood breaking. She now had a fairly good idea of what was going on, though the specifics of it still eluded her. Ever seeking expansion, the Horde had a voracious appetite for wood. They needed it for building, for their forges, for their growing fleets. And that was why they most coveted Ashenvale. "It would be wiser to go on foot from here," Xanon whispered. Nodding, Haldrissa dismounted, and then she and Xanon loosely tethered their cats. Highly intelligent, these nightsabers would obey the command to stay until called by one of the riders. In an emergency, it better served Haldrissa if the animals could quickly come to their aid. Xanon once more took the lead, the younger night elf crouching low. The wind shifted toward them. While good in that it kept their scent from the orcs, it also brought a stench that answered some of Haldrissa's other questions. The smell included a combination of fuel and steam. Those were signs of a goblin machine. Several machines, judging by the potent and often suffocating odor. Goblins were almost the antithesis of night elves; they believed in the might of machines over nature and had little, if any, respect for the latter. "There!" Xanon rasped, thrusting a finger to the northeast. At first Haldrissa thought some armored giant stalked the forest, a giant intent on carnage. What in some ways resembled a glaive with far, far sharper, curved points spun madly at the end of one arm. The other arm ended in a monstrous claw with four digits that at that moment seized the trunk of a thick oak. The giant then thrust the spinning blades at the tree. To her horror, the blades cut into the wood as if it were water. Within seconds the mighty oak teetered, its life already gone. But the giant figure was not satisfied with just that. It shifted position and began slicing the tree into smaller pieces. Only then did Haldrissa see that atop the head, there was a seat . . . and in that seat, a short figure with green skin, long ears, and a sadistic smile manipulated levers. "A shredder," she murmured back to Xanon. "A goblin shredder!" There had been reports of the machines being brought in farther east, but to find one this
close was disturbing. "Wait," Xanon whispered. "Keep listening." Before she could ask why, the buzzing arose from another location. As the two looked, a second shredder trundled into view. The silver and crimson mechanism paused. The upper half turned to one side as no true creature could without breaking its spine. In the seat and half-shielded by the armored front, another goblin surveyed the nearest trees. Choosing one, he tugged on a lever, and the spinning blades began their diabolical work. Haldrissa silently swore at such sacrilege. She started to rise-only to have sense make her duck down just as a third and fourth shredder stepped into sight. "They have a major lumber operation in progress here," the male night elf told her. "I counted two more before. They are ripping apart this area of Ashenvale as if the trees had no feelings, no importance!" "Six shredders." Haldrissa did some calculations. "We can handle that many -" And then the scene became an even more horrible nightmare. Another shredder joined the others, followed by another and another and another. . . . More than a score quickly filled their view, and yet the numbers continued to grow. "By Elune!" gasped Xanon. "This is worse than I imagined!" "We must leave!" returned Haldrissa, beginning to back away. The two Sentinels, their eyes ever on the horror, retreated, heading for the area where they had left their mounts. The wind shifted direction again. A thick smell of fuel and steam assailed Haldrissa from their left. "Beware!" she cried, shoving Xanon away from that direction. The shredder came crashing through the trees and brush, the metallic claws ripping away branches that blocked the path. High-pitched maniacal laughter cut above the sound of spinning blades. With a death's-head grin, the goblin adjusted the levers. The blades came at Haldrissa. She was forced to dodge toward her blind side and thus stumbled. The blades just barely grazed her shoulder. However, despite that and the fact that Haldrissa wore plate armor, the shredder was still able to cut through the metal and rip a tiny but painful gash in her flesh. The wound, though shallow, startled the commander enough that she again
made for a tempting target. The upper half of the shredder turned toward her. Another wild laugh escaped the goblin as he maneuvered the whirring blades. The Sentinels' only good fortune thus far lay in that this goblin had moved far ahead of the rest and, because of the din created by the destruction of the forest, their struggle went unheard. Haldrissa could not hope for that to continue, though. At the very least, she and Xanon had to escape. A whirling glaive flew by her. It came within a yard of the goblin before the other arm deflected it. Xanon's weapon went skimming wildly through the air, at last sinking deep into a nearby trunk. The attack had at least served to give Haldrissa breathing space. In that time, she jumped out of reach, then readied her own glaive. The goblin shifted levers. The shredder marched toward her. The one arm continued to act as shield while the other with the spinning, toothy blades stretched forth. Haldrissa took the measure of the shredder, then, compensating for her impaired vision, threw. Her toss looked as if it had gone wide at first, but as it passed the grinning goblin, it arced around. The commander kept her expression frozen, afraid of giving warning. But she had underestimated both the goblin and his device. The squat creature tugged a lever, and the protecting arm twisted over his head in a manner that would have been impossible for a living creature. With a harsh clang, her glaive rebounded off of the arm and away from the struggle. Haldrissa swore. "C'mere, purple!" the goblin mocked. "Lemme give you a hug!" The arms swung toward her from opposite directions, seeking to pen her between them so that the blades could do their work. Haldrissa dropped to the ground, barely avoiding being beheaded. She fully expected the goblin to immediately compensate, but instead the arms began flailing madly. As the commander pushed herself up, she saw Xanon scrambling up the side of the shredder. He did not have his glaive, but the dagger in his left hand was more than sufficient for dealing with the shredder's operator-if the male night elf could get a little closer. The goblin was having none of that. The flailing was accompanied by the swiveling of the torso, all in an attempt to knock Xanon free. While it had not succeeded in that respect, it did keep the Sentinel from using his blade.
Aware that trying to signal the others now might also alert all the goblins and whatever other elements of the Horde were nearby of the Alliance presence, Haldrissa tried to think of some way to quickly put an end to their lone foe. She peered around. Her own glaive was too far away, but Xanon's remained stuck in the nearby tree. She darted for the weapon, hoping that her companion could keep the goblin distracted long enough-and without dying in the process. But though she reached the glaive without difficulty, pulling it free proved a much more troublesome task. The glaive had buried itself deep, and even though Haldrissa tugged as hard as she could-all the while gritting her teeth as her effort made her wound sting much greater-it would not come free. Buzzing filled her ears. She glanced in the direction of the other shredders, but they were not even in sight . . . and therefore not the source of the increased buzzing. Haldrissa ducked. The blades of the lone shredder tore into the tree. Splinters and sawdust rained down upon the night elf. A screeching sound tore at her eardrums. As she rolled aside, she saw that the shredder's blades had met the glaive. The resultant collision had made both the shredder and the tree shake violently. Swearing, the goblin adjusted several levers. The other arm came up and braced against the trunk. With amazing strength, the shredder used the leverage to push free. Haldrissa saw no sign of Xanon and had to assume the worst. With his glaive ruined, she surveyed the area for her own. The damaged tree creaked ominously. Haldrissa stepped back but saw that the danger was not as imminent as she had thought. The tree shook slightly, then stilled. The goblin adjusted the levers, then moved in on her again. As he did, Haldrissa finally caught a glimpse of Xanon. He lay sprawled next to another tree. She could not see any sign of injury, but the stillness of the body did not give her much hope. However, seeing Xanon stirred a desperate plan. The commander hoped that she judged the damage to the tree correctly, or else she was about to throw herself into the jaws of death.
"Xanon!" she roared. "To his left!" The goblin reacted accordingly. Straining at the levers, he made the torso spin around to confront the threat he believed there. Had Haldrissa attempted to leap up at him, he would have had more than enough time to notice her and prevent success. Instead, the night elf ran behind the damaged tree. The goblin saw that the male Sentinel still lay unconscious or was dead. He pulled a lever, and the shredder started to turn back to her. Bracing herself, Haldrissa threw her body against the back of the tree. The collision shook her to the bone, but she heard the wood give a satisfying snap. The tree toppled. Haldrissa made a silent prayer to Elune. She had judged both the damage and the angle true. The huge tree fell toward the shredder. The goblin looked up as the shadow covered him. He frantically adjusted the levers, raising both arms in an attempt to stop the tree. However, when it became clear that the arms would not stop the tree in time, the goblin pushed himself out of his seat. He did not make it. The tree reduced the shredder and its handler to a squat ruin. The tanks that fueled the mechanism ruptured. The shredder exploded, sending metal fragments and bits of goblin flying everywhere. Even before the tree had struck, Haldrissa had headed for Xanon. She did not want to leave her officer if there was even a chance he lived. "Xanon!" the commander hissed. "Xanon!" He did not stir, but Haldrissa saw that the male Sentinel did at least breathe. There was a heavy bruise on the side of his head, and blood stained his face and arm. With no other option, Haldrissa wrapped her arm around the other night elf's upper torso and, ignoring the pain in her arm, dragged him from the site. Peering over her shoulder, she caught a glimpse of one of the other shredders starting to move toward the ruined one. So low to the ground, Haldrissa believed that its operator could not yet see her or her burden, but she nonetheless hurried as best she could. If the pair was spotted, they would never
escape. A glint caught her eye. Grimacing, Haldrissa set down Xanon long enough to retrieve her glaive. It meant the cost of a few valuable seconds, but without the glaive there would be absolutely no chance of defending the two of them. The sound of encroaching shredders increased. There were no cries of discovery, though. The commander counted on the hope that the goblins would focus on their own, thinking that perhaps the operator had miscalculated while trying to bring down the tree rather than that he had been sadistically hunting down night elf prey. She only needed that false belief to last long enough for her to reach the cats. Dragging Xanon, Haldrissa finally paused at a spot several yards away and out of sight. She let out a low whistle. Her heart pounded as she waited. Finally, her mount trotted into view. The nightsaber rubbed its muzzle against her side. The second cat joined them. It sniffed Xanon and let out a low growl. Haldrissa shushed it, then settled the unmoving officer over the creature's back. When that was done, she mounted her own animal. Behind her, a commotion arose as the goblins investigated what Haldrissa hoped still passed for an accident. Exhaling deeply, the commander urged the nightsabers forward. She did not relax in the least until they were far away. Haldrissa counted the seconds until she reached the rest of the party, all of whom eyed her arrival with trepidation. "Take care of him!" she ordered two of the others. As they took control of Xanon, Haldrissa faced the rest. "It is worse than we had imagined! More mechanized goblin shredders than I had thought could exist! They are already ripping apart the forest over here. We can assume that they are doing the same elsewhere, I am sorry to say." "We should charge in and take care of those little vermin!" snarled one Sentinel. "We should be able to handle such scum!" Some of the others issued their agreement by raising their glaives, but Haldrissa immediately cut off any notion of an attack. "There will be no suicidal attack! We ride back now! This information must be passed on to Darnassus!" "And then we just wait?" blurted one of the others. "Of course not! Enough questions!" To the two night elves handling Xanon,
she commanded, "Secure him well! We will have to ride hard!" Haldrissa paused as she saw their faces. "He is dead," the nearest Sentinel informed her and the rest. "For some minutes. The wound to his head was too grave." To emphasize her point, she tilted Xanon's head until the party could see the blackening bruise and increased blood flow, something to which Haldrissa, caught up in the escape, had not been able to pay attention. The commander scowled. Another death at the Horde's hand. Though her body ached, her pulse pounded. "They will pay. They will pay for all the deaths . . . including those of the forest." Haldrissa urged her mount on, the others following in her wake. She glanced behind her. The body of Xanon, secured well, rode with them-the dead rider very likely a harbinger of things to come, she knew.
8
ARRIVALS
Although there would be an official entrance by the various members of the Alliance once the summit had commenced, arrangements had been made for the representatives' personal arrivals beforehand. The night elves had been willing to host everyone in the capital, but by majority vote from the others, it was agreed that the emissaries and a small personal escort would stay in Darnassus while the rest of their people remained aboard the various vessels. The full contingents would march in the procession opening the summit; then, after the ceremony, they would return to the ships until the gathering's end. The high priestess had finally seen the wisdom of the decision, though not for the reasons her guests had used. The more members of each nation staying in the capital during the delicate proceedings, the greater the chance of tempers flaring and incidents overtaking their goals. With each realm still reeling from the Cataclysm, the risk of that happening was very high already. Theramore was the first member of the Alliance to reach Teldrassil. Tyrande and Malfurion met the key representative and his escort as they exited the portal into Darnassus. "Well met, Archmage Tervosh," the high priestess greeted. The black-haired mage bowed his head to both. "In the name of Lady Jaina Proudmoore, ruler of the isle of Theramore, I thank you for your hospitality during this most significant of functions." "We are honored to have you here in her stead, though we hope that Lady Jaina is well." Tervosh smoothed his black and violet robes. As one of Jaina Proudmoore's aides, he also wore a somewhat elaborate gold vest with ornamented shoulders.
"With the troubles brewing all around us, she chose to stay in order to continue organizing Alliance forces. You can trust that she would rather be here, High Priestess." "Her martial knowledge has been invaluable during these dark days," Malfurion put in. "In that, at least, she takes after her father." Tervosh said nothing more, the subject of Admiral Daelin Proudmoore a delicate one. His obsession with the orcs had led to his untimely death in battle against the half-breed Rexxar during the storming of Theramore's keep. Rexxar, in whose veins ogre blood also flowed, had not wanted the admiral's death, but Daelin had given them no choice. Admiral Proudmoore's daughter still mourned him, even though his actions had forced her to side with the Horde over her own father. The high priestess hesitated, then asked, "And how is Pained?" Tervosh pursed his lips. "She performs her duties for Lady Jaina as stoically as ever. The great scar from her confrontation with dark magi is nothing compared to the scars left in her mind because of that event." He shrugged. "But she will not accept any help. Her stubbornness has always been both a detriment and a saving grace." "I will continue to pray for her healing, both without and within." Tyrande shook her head, then smiled once more. "But on to more immediate matters. You will wish to refresh yourselves." She indicated one of her aides. "Please show the archmage and his escort to their quarters." Tervosh bowed again. "I look forward to the summit." As the emissary from Theramore departed, the high priestess murmured, "And there goes probably the easiest of those with whom we shall deal. Would that all the others could see matters as straightforward as Theramore." "They will see sense, Tyrande. They must." The archmage had barely left them when news came that the dwarven emissaries had arrived on the island. From all three clans. "This can hardly be coincidence," Tyrande declared as she and her mate, joined now by several priestesses, waited before the portal. "Could they have traveled together?" "The Bronzebeards and the Wildhammers had agreed to, due to Rut'theran's limited dock space, but I had not heard about the Dark Irons. Amazing to think that they managed to sail here with them aboard as well. If they did, I suspect
that the clans stayed in separate parts of the ship throughout the entire journey and very likely even disembarked separately." "I would not have wanted to make that journey," the high priestess returned with a shake of her head. They waited for the three emissaries to come through the portal, but time went on and still nothing happened. The archdruid and Tyrande exchanged concerned glances. "Perhaps I should go down-" But Malfurion got no further before the portal flared and the first of the dwarves entered the capital. "Hail, Thargas Anvilmar!" Tyrande said, immediately recognizing the grizzled dwarf known as a hero among the Bronzebeards. Thargas had acted as representative during previous discussions between his people and Darnassus. "Hail to ye, me lady," the squat but muscular figure rumbled. Although he stood much shorter than either night elf, he was more than twice Malfurion's width, and all of that muscle. "Fergive the delay! Bit o' an argument over who went up first. . . ." The dwarven race was in flux, the tensions among the clans of much concern even to Tyrande and her mate. Other than Stormwind, the dwarves as a whole had been one of the most questionable of the possible attendees. The night elves were pleased that they had arrived . . . but if it only meant that the emissaries would come to blows, then all would be for naught. "How was it settled?" Not by axe, Tyrande hoped. Thargas chuckled. "Wildhammer suggested we roll the bones! Best idea! We did that . . . an' Bronzebeard won, o' course!" The high priestess and Malfurion allowed themselves smiles. Trust dwarves to choose such a basic path to solve their problem. "We are pleased to see you," the archdruid added. "Thank you for coming." "Ye've been strong allies. Bronzebeard wouldna turn its back on that. Now, the Dark Irons, maybe . . ." Tyrande led the emissary and his band forward. "You must be hungry after your travels. These two will guide you to your chambers and to the meal we have arranged for you." "There be drink too?" "Both night elven wine and dwarven ale." Thargas's grin widened. With a nod, he led his group after the two
priestesses. Tyrande relaxed a little once the dwarves were out of sight. "Well done, my love," the archdruid whispered. "Best to get them moving so as not to stir up troubles again, especially if the next ones through are-" The portal flared, and a small band of dour black-clad dwarves warily stepped through. They were of a pale, almost deathly complexion and, to the archdruid, were almost interchangeable save for the fact that some had dusky brown hair, others a dull black or faded red. Only the lead dwarf seemed to have any true individuality, and that from the cunning the night elf could read in the emissary's burning red eyes. Although their weapons were not drawn, the Dark Irons' hands hovered near them, just in case. However, upon seeing only Malfurion, Tyrande, and the priestesses waiting to help guide the guests, the group relaxed . . . slightly. "Hail, emissary of the Dark Iron clan . . . " Tyrande uttered, unfamiliar with any of the party, including the leader. "I am Drukan. I speak fer Moira Thaurissan," the shadowy figure in the forefront rasped. His red eyes took stock of the two chief figures in front of him, clearly sizing up their potential as threats. "You are welcome, Drukan, you and your escort. We have your quarters available, not to mention meal and drink." "We've brought our own." Drukan indicated several heavy sacks and kegs of ale his companions carried. "We'll need nothin'." "As you like. I will see that they are removed. If you change your mind, please let me know." Drukan grunted. He and his cohort trailed after the two guides Tyrande provided. Once the Dark Iron dwarves had stepped out of earshot, Malfurion muttered, "Trusting souls." "They came here. That says a lot. And from what little you have told me, they seem to be in about as much agreement with us as the Bronzebeards." "The Dark Iron dwarves cannot afford to become isolated right now. They need to maintain ties with the Alliance in general, if not perhaps their fellow dwarves." The portal activated again. "Wildhammer greets its hosts!" the short, rather stout figure in red and gold armor roared cheerfully from the forefront of the latest arrivals. The other
dwarves behind him added their own boisterous rumbles of agreement, a few accenting their greetings with waves of their hammers. Tyrande stepped forward to greet the leader. "Welcome, Kurdran. A pleasure to have you with us." The dwarf, his long, thick beard an even more fiery red than his armor, smiled. "I thought I'd waited long enough before poppin' up. Those Dark Irons give any problem?" "Other than refusing our food and drink, they were very polite," the archdruid answered. "Like as nae they're afraid o' bein' poisoned by someone, as it's nae so uncommon among their ilk. Glad tae hear everythin' went as I'd planned, then." "'Planned'?" The Wildhammer dwarf leaned close and in a conspiratorial tone explained, "None o' us wanted the others tae get tae the island first, an' no one wanted tae be dead last. So we all agreed tae arrive at the same time, our honor on that sworn on the hammer." Kurdran snorted. "No one mentioned this portal, though. Got tae it, an' arguin' broke out about who had the right tae go up ahead o' the others!" "And that was when someone suggested gambling for it?" "Well . . . I didna exactly say it that way, but, yes, that's what I told 'em." The high priestess's eyes narrowed knowingly. "You were the one who suggested it. . . ." "That's it! And worked out very well, I think." Tyrande pressed. "So it is sheer coincidence that the order happened as it did? You seem very cheerful for being third, and the Dark Irons' being second is perhaps the safest situation there." Kurdran cocked his head. If anything, his grin widened more. "Now, would I be the type to go fixin' a game o' bones?" "You must be weary after your long journey," she said, as if the question had not been asked. Tyrande, smiling back, gestured to two more priestesses. "They will take you to your quarters. Food and drink have been made ready." "I thank ye fer all o' us!" The dwarf gave both his hosts hearty handshakes, then led his party off after the guides. The encounter with Kurdran proved only a slight reprieve. As other
representatives arrived, both night elves again became aware of just how much hung on the success of the gathering-and how much also hung on not only Varian Wrynn's arrival but his agreement on the most important matters as well. There had still been no official word concerning the king of Stormwind's coming, and while both trusted Shandris's report, they could not help but grow concerned. With the arrival of each other faction, the thought that perhaps something had happened grew stronger. When it seemed clear that no more ships would arrive for some time, the duo gratefully retired. There were no official audiences: Tyrande had wanted the emissaries to relax first, the better for their minds to be calm for the upcoming debates. "No one spoke of his own realm's troubles," the archdruid noted as they neared the temple. "Perhaps that will not be a situation during the gathering." "Do you really think so?" Malfurion shook his head. "No. Not really." Their conversation ended as both noticed a pair of conspicuous figures waiting outside the temple. Even from a distance, their brilliant garments marked them as Highborne. "Archmage Mordent," Tyrande greeted politely. The Highborne leader was slightly thinner than his companion, and his face was more lined. "Var'dyn. To what do we owe this unexpected pleasure?" Neither Highborne gave any indication that there might have been some hint of sarcasm on her part. They knew the high priestess well enough to know that she treated them respectfully. "Var'dyn here insisted that we come. I knew you had other pressing matters to attend to, but it seems the only way to assuage his concerns and those of the younger, more impatient ones." "Is something amiss?" The younger Highborne cut in. "The perfect question, save that instead of something, you might say someone!" "Mind your place!" Mordent insisted to his protégé. "There can be a hundred innocent reasons for Thera'brin's absence!" Malfurion took command of the conversation. "One of yours is missing, Archmage? When was he last seen?"
"He was one of those with me," Var'dyn answered. "No one noticed that he did not return until much later." "Everyone was unaffected by the spellwork?" "Of course! We knew what we were doing!" The younger Highborne looked very offended by any suggestion otherwise. Mordent shook his head in disappointment. "Behave yourself! You will answer with the proper respect the archdruid and high priestess deserve." Var'dyn grudgingly nodded. "My apologies, Archdruid. Continue, please." "Does anyone recall where they last saw him?" Malfurion pressed. "None remember him returning after the spellwork. I asked all of them." The archdruid considered what Var'dyn had said, then turned to his mate. "I had best deal with this now." "I think so. Please be cautious." He smiled grimly. "I will be." •   •   •
Var'dyn led Malfurion back to the location of the spellcasting. The mage obviously still distrusted anyone who was not one of the Highborne, but answered all of the archdruid's questions. "And no one recalls at all where he even stood?" "There was no need to." Malfurion could not fault that logic, though it seemed to him that if the Highborne had as much concern for one another as they pretended, someone would at least have remembered something concerning the missing spellcaster's whereabouts. The archdruid knelt down near the area where the circle had formed. He waved his hand over the grass and murmured to the blades. Have you seen? Malfurion asked of them. Have you seen? The grass was eager to speak with him, for no one generally asked any favor, but it could only state that some group of creatures had tread upon it. It was the answer that Malfurion had expected, but despite not having learned anything, he still thanked the grass. "I cast spells over the area but found no clue," Var'dyn offered. "Did everyone head in the same general direction after I departed?" "Why would we go any other? You think we want to wander into those humans you have got settled farther out?" Var'dyn did not hide his contempt.
Malfurion chose to ignore the tone. "And Thera'brin returned alone?" The mage looked impatient. "You have asked this before." "And I will ask it again, if I have to. You would be surprised how an answer can suddenly change." The archdruid slowly rose, then, after catching his breath, started off in the direction that he recalled most of the Highborne heading. "Do you remember your own path back?" "Of course." "Lead on." With a shrug, Var'dyn obeyed. He pushed through the underbrush, Malfurion right behind him. As they walked, the archdruid continued to reach out to the flora, speaking to various trees, bushes, and more . . . but with the same predictable lack of results. This was not a use of his skills for which even Malfurion was prepared. "Are we done here?" asked Var'dyn at last. "I see no reason for you to stay. I would like to survey the area a bit more." "As you like." The Highborne departed without another word. Sighing, Malfurion looked over the territory. In truth, he could think of little else he could do, but he had not wanted to give up in front of the Highborne. He suspected that Var'dyn had not quite shown him the path that the Highborne had followed. But even if Malfurion had known the precise path, it was doubtful that he would have gleaned anything useful from the plant life. The flora had taken notice of the spellwork but had otherwise paid no mind to the creatures involved in it once it had ceased. One of the largest trees shifted its branches. In doing so, it spoke to the archdruid. Someone was watching him from deeper in the forest. Without even turning, Malfurion set the forest in motion to deal with the spying eyes. The trees in that direction bent down, their branches creating an impenetrable wall around the hidden observer's vicinity. At the same time, the underbrush sprouted, ensuring that it would tangle in his or her footing. Flowers, suddenly blooming, released clouds of pollen. With easy steps, the archdruid strode toward the area. As he neared, he heard not only futile struggling but also coughing. The flora gave way to him, creating a passage just wide enough. Malfurion held his staff ready, although in truth he feared little.
A figure became visible as the foremost trees straightened and the underbrush shifted. He continued to cough and also sought to rub his eyes clear. The pollen, while seemingly insignificant, had invaded both his lungs and his eyes with effectiveness. Malfurion gestured. A selective wind swirled around the other figure. With the direction that only Malfurion could give it, it not only blew the pollen from the other's gaze but also provided fresh air that helped lessen the coughing. Through bloodshot eyes, Eadrik stared at the night elf. "A-Archdruid!" The human sneezed. "Praise be! I thought some monstrous creature had me!" "Merely a precaution. When others are spying on me, I like to know who they are." Genn's man looked aghast. "Spying on you? Hardly that! I was just on a hunt. I flushed out the prey, but lost it around here. I thought I heard it in that direction"-he pointed where Malfurion had come from-"and a moment later the entire land seemed to fall upon me!" Malfurion gestured, and the rest of the barrier vanished. He need not have made any motion, but felt it was good to further remind Eadrik of just whom he faced and why it might be wise to speak truthfully. Of course, Malfurion intended no true harm to the human, but keeping Eadrik off balance might provide the night elf with some information. "You are far from the encampment, Eadrik. It must have been quite the hunt to bring you this far. Now . . . would you like to explain again?" The Gilnean looked away. Malfurion could all but read him. Eadrik feared betraying his lord in even the slightest manner. "Your loyalty is commendable, but if you do not tell me now, I must demand the truth from Genn. With the summit imminent, any question I have concerning Gilneas's application to rejoin the Alliance might tilt matters in a direction neither he nor I would prefer." The human swallowed, then finally nodded. "It's nothing, Archdruid! I wasn't meaning to watch you at all! It's just that you happened to be here- happened to be here with one of them. . . ." "One of . . . the Highborne? You have been watching the Highborne?" Swallowing again, Eadrik continued: "My lord knows some of their history from you and others. He distrusts whatever influence they might have."
It was something Malfurion had heard before. Those previous to state this belief had all been night elves, though. "No slight was meant to you," the human quickly added. "My lord has the greatest respect for your abilities and word." "Then he may take my word that the Highborne are of no concern to Gilneas. That should keep him from sending you or anyone else on unnecessary excursions." Eadrik bowed his head. "Yes, Archdruid." Malfurion took on a kinder tone. "I know that you are all on edge due to the summit. It will go well." "We understand." "Please give Genn my best." The human gave a short bow, then scurried into the forest. Malfurion frowned and turned toward Darnassus. He believed that Eadrik had told the truth when he had said that Genn Greymane distrusted the Highborne. The archdruid also believed that Gilneas had not had anything to do with the one mage's disappearance. But what Malfurion Stormrage also believed was that this incident somehow was tied to the summit . . . and possibly the desired failure of it.
9
A FINAL FAREWELL
The funeral for Shalasyr was a short, relatively modest affair despite Tyrande's desire to see Jarod's bride honored appropriately. That had been due to Jarod's choice: he had felt that Shalasyr would have not wanted much pomp and circumstance. She had preferred simplicity, and he believed that included her final rites. Of course, there was also the nagging guilt that perhaps Jarod had insisted on the shorter ceremony simply so as to lessen his agony a bit. Attendance was limited to those who had known her best. The high priestess stood behind the funeral bier upon which the body of Shalasyr had been placed. The light of Elune shone down through the temple ceiling, focusing on both Jarod's beloved and Tyrande. "Darkness covered us in the beginning," she uttered, "and we could not see. We cried for guidance and the moon shone down bright upon us. Her soft light not only illuminated the night for us but also gave comfort. Her light touched us from within, enabling us to see even when the moon was not visible. . . ." Whether this was entirely fact was not something debated among the night elves. What the high priestess stated concerned as much the souls of her people as it did actual events. What no one could argue with was that the Mother Moon took special care with her favored children, and they were grateful to her for that. Jarod knelt at the forefront, his gaze never leaving Shalasyr's beautiful, almost ethereal face. She could have been a marble statue, so perfect did she seem to him. His mate looked utterly at peace, even appearing to wear the hint of a smile. "Now," Tyrande went on, "we ask that the Mother Moon guide our sister
Shalasyr on her sacred journey and that her ancestors and loved ones who have gone before her will make her welcome. . . ." Jarod heard nothing after that. He saw only his life with Shalasyr and all the mistakes that he had made during it. He was grateful that she had put up with him despite all those mistakes when, had she remained behind, she could have been a revered priestess of the Mother Moon. Tyrande raised her arms, reaching toward the moonlight. Jarod broke out of his reverie for a moment, then lost interest again. He looked up a moment later as a silver aura suddenly radiated from Shalasyr's body. No one else seemed to notice . . . or at least no one reacted. Jarod stared at the soft, comforting glow as it rose over his beloved. It took on the vague shape of a figure and slowly separated from the still form. "Shalasyr . . . ," Jarod murmured. The shape paused and, to his mind, looked in his direction for the space of a single breath. Suddenly he recalled other tender moments in his time with his mate, in some cases moments he had not remembered in centuries. Jarod relived each as if it had happened only yesterday. Shalasyr's spirit shrank in upon itself, becoming a tiny, glowing ball. It hovered a moment more, then moved as if drawn by the moonlight. As the sphere swept into the moonlight, it dissipated . . . and Jarod felt Shalasyr's presence vanish at the same time. Jarod let out a gasp, but, fortunately, no one paid him any mind. At some point Tyrande had lowered her arms, and from her expression it appeared that the ceremony was nearly finished. Indeed, all that remained was for her and Jarod to lead the bier and a procession of mourners out of the temple, through the gardens, and into an area beyond the city. There a small party of druids, led by Malfurion, greeted them. Tyrande spoke to all. "As Shalasyr's spirit has departed her mortal vessel, let that vessel now return its strength to the world. . . ." The druids took up the body. With reverence, they set it into a soft patch of grass and small bushes. Two female druids lovingly adjusted Shalasyr so that she again looked as if she were only dreaming. "Teldrassil welcomes this child," Malfurion intoned. "The world welcomes this child back."
The archdruid raised his staff. A soft wind swept through the area. The treetops gently swayed. Around Shalasyr's body, shoots grew, then bloomed into white and golden flowers. At first they simply outlined Jarod's mate, but then their numbers grew so great that they began to drape over her. More and more flowers blossomed, quickly spilling over her. The effect was a beautiful draping of the female night elf, and Jarod could not help thinking how fitting the sight was. Her serene face was the last part to be covered by the foliage. The flowers continued to sprout, rising into a tremendous cornucopia of color. A rich, wondrous scent wafted past Jarod's nose, a scent that reminded him so much of Shalasyr. Those who had come now paid their respects to him, then left. Soon there remained only a handful of observers, including Malfurion and Tyrande. "This went as well as it could have," the archdruid offered. "There will be more and more of these ceremonies as mortality catches up with us," Jarod returned, before Tyrande could say so herself. "I am honored that Shalasyr was one of the first. It made her . . . her departure a little easier to take, I admit." He bowed his head to the high priestess. "I must confess I was especially touched when you made it seem as if Shalasyr's spirit had risen up to join the Mother Moon. . . ." Tyrande looked puzzled. "I planned no such thing. I would have been very afraid of offending you, Jarod." She gazed deep into his eyes. "You saw that happen?" "Yes, but-" "Elune favors you! I would envy your moment, save that I respect that she made it one between you and Shalasyr only." "It . . . was not you?" "No." Jarod's eyes widened, but he quickly recovered. He glanced at the lingering attendees. "I was hoping Maiev would come." Tyrande cleared her throat. "You should not take it personally. Your sister has been through much; there was a time when she and I could not face one another-" The former guard captain frowned. "I know of it, High Priestess. She related part of it to me earlier. The rest I was told by some of those who knew my sister
and me when we were young or who were privy to events." "But only Malfurion and I, or Maiev herself, could tell you about what truly happened. . . ." "I-I know that she was Illidan's jailor and that at some point she was his prisoner . . . and that he tortured her." The high priestess looked sad. "I blame myself for so much that happened to Maiev. I should never have left her for so long in charge of Illidan's imprisonment." "I should have realized more than you, my love," the archdruid countered. "He was my brother. My twin." To Jarod, he explained, "When Illidan was liberated-after so many millennia-it was as if her entire life had been for nothing. Her greatest purpose had become keeping him imprisoned. Maiev was all but shattered." "Yes, that would be how my sister would react. There was never a greater love for her than her duty." Tyrande took control of the story once more. "She was determined to hunt him down. It went from duty to obsession. Unfortunately, circumstances were not so simple; events happened that led to disaster for all of us. I tried to stop a threat and nearly lost my life to it. Rather than come to my aid, Maiev chose to pursue Illidan-" "Just say that she chose to sacrifice you!" Malfurion blurted with revived anger. "Mal! Remember yourself!" Tyrande's eyes went from her mate to Jarod. The archdruid bowed his head to Maiev's brother. "Forgive me, Jarod. I should not put your sister in such a light, especially at this time. . . ." "I care only for the truth . . . however terrible it might be." "The truth is," the high priestess muttered with much sympathy, "that she convinced others, including Malfurion, that I was dead-swept away in a raging river-and that his brother was to blame. Nothing mattered but that Illidan be caught and finally made to pay for all his crimes." She nearly succeeded, Jarod learned. But when Malfurion had seen the horror in Illidan's face when he had learned of what had happened to Tyrande, the plan had fallen apart. Through the confession of the mage Kael'thas-who would later become the guiding force behind the creation of the magic-addicted blood elves-they had then learned of Maiev's falsehood. The archdruid had
kept Maiev rooted where she was while he and Illidan had gone on to rescue Tyrande. Afterward, Malfurion, feeling that he owed his twin for that, had been instrumental in seeing to Illidan's flight and exile into the otherworldly realm called Outland. What felt like a chill wind coursed over Maiev's brother, making him briefly shiver. Jarod found it strange that neither the archdruid nor the high priestess noticed the cold. Then he realized the chill had actually come from within, from becoming more aware as to how his sister's sense of duty had relentlessly driven her on. "I know what happens next. My sister would not give up even then," Jarod remarked dourly. "She followed, and the rest of what I learned came to be. The pursuit through Outland, her capture and torture, and finally her part, alongside others, in the slaying of-pardon, Archdruid-of your brother." Malfurion shook his head. "You have no reason to apologize. This is all knowledge you should have-if not from us, then from Maiev." "For a time, we thought her dead . . . as we had thought you, Jarod." The high priestess looked down. "Her Watchers had all but perished due to her obsession. When Maiev did return, there were bitter feelings and mistrust. Her mind had been ravaged, yet she endured. Her resilience is one reason we were able to make amends, Jarod. There is much to admire about your sister and much we owe her despite all that happened." Tyrande put a comforting hand on his arm. "It is kind of you to say that." Jarod shifted uncomfortably. "If I may, I would like to spend some time here alone." "Of course. We must return, anyway. More of our guests are arriving." The former commander nodded. "May all go well with the summit." "We can only hope." The high priestess and the archdruid each respectfully bowed to Jarod, then left him by the burial site. He watched them depart, aware that he had not been told everything. However, none of that truly mattered now. All he cared about was this final place of rest for his Shalasyr. Jarod knelt by the flowers. Their scent touched his soul and immediately made him think of tender moments with his mate. He imagined her with him. And at last, with the visual evidence of Shalasyr laid to rest, and with his mind now forced to think beyond the moment, Jarod Shadowsong looked to
the flowers and quietly asked, "So what becomes of me?"
Malfurion did not speak until they were far from Jarod, and even then he kept his voice low. "You were not honest . . . at least, not fully. You did not tell him everything about the conflict between you and Maiev when she reappeared."
"It was not necessary. Maiev and I understand one another. Her devotion to duty is not something to be taken lightly. She has made amends and that is the end of it." "I am glad, but then, why did you not tell him more?" Tyrande smiled softly. "That right belongs to Maiev." Their attention was caught by a young priestess moving toward them. Her expression was anxious. "High Priestess," she greeted, bowing. "There are more arrivals below . . . apparently from a submarine." "A submarine. That means the gnomes have arrived too. Almost everyone is here, then," Malfurion said. Tyrande nodded. "There is no sign of any ship from Stormwind?" "No, High Priestess." "I see." Tyrande exhaled. "Thank you for the news. We shall go directly to the portal. Have attendants ready for our new guests." "Yes, High Priestess." The other female rushed off to obey. "He will come," the archdruid offered. "He has to." "That is what Shandris indicated . . . but if Varian Wrynn is coming, he is waiting until the very last moment. We cannot very well hold off the summit until we know with all certainty." "No . . . but there will be little point to it if he does not come." "Now, Mal . . ." They did not discuss the point more. Returning to the portal, the night elves waited for the gnomes. As the pause lengthened, Malfurion and his mate looked at each other in curiosity and not a little concern. "Could one of their devices have gone off down there?" the archdruid finally asked. "Someone likely would have come through to report it." "Assuming anyone could . . ." The portal abruptly shimmered again. With some relief, they watched for
the gnomish leader to step through. But what took shape within at first looked like nothing with which the archdruid, at least, was familiar. It had two long legs bent back like a bird's, a stout, round carriage, and what seemed two pairs of arms, the upper ones much smaller than the lower duo. For its size and girth, it also appeared to have a relatively tiny head. The figure fully formed, and despite all his concerns, Malfurion could not help chuckling quietly at the newcomer. The bald gnome had the large-nosed, round face of his ilk and in some manner resembled a short, fat human, although there was no known link between the two races. This particular gnome, despite being elder in status, seemed as animated as a child. He was not so tall-in fact, standing, he was a foot shorter than Kurdran and certainly barely a third of the latter's bulk. Malfurion had to make all these assumptions from past visits, for most of the gnome was hidden by what had first appeared to be his body and was instead some fantastical walking device. The newcomer raised a pair of odd goggles, then peered at the night elves with inquisitive eyes. "High Priestess Tyrande Whisperwind and Archdruid Malfurion Stormrage!" the gnome rattled off at a breathtaking rate of speech. "I am pleased to be here!" "High Tinker Gelbin Mekkatorque, you are most welcome," Tyrande declared. Gelbin tugged on his short white beard in thought, then grinned. The machine marched him forward until he was within a yard of his hosts. The huge right arm of the machine suddenly shot toward Malfurion. Although not frightened, the archdruid chose caution and took a step back. A three-fingered "hand" paused within a couple of inches of his chest. "Oh, do excuse me! I've been trying these experimental arm attachments for the newest mechanostriders! Still fine-tuning the movements! I only meant to have it shake hands!" Steeling himself, Malfurion reached to the mechanical hand. The gnome shifted a lever and the hand gripped the night elf's own. Tyrande let out a slight gasp of concern, but Malfurion simply did as the high tinker suggested, shaking the walker's hand. The moment that was done, the fingers released their hold on the night elf, and the arm retracted.
With clinical interest, Gelbin Mekkatorque leaned over and asked, "How was the pressure? Any fractures or breaks?" "No . . . none at all." "Ah, finally!" Gelbin sat back in triumph. Behind the walker, other gnomes stepped through the portal. Unlike their leader, they came in on foot, although all wore objects or gear that clearly were devices of their own manufacture. They peered up at the high tinker, then at the night elves. Tyrande greeted the rest of the party, then said to Gelbin, "We have food and drink prepared . . . and space set aside for your . . . endeavors." "Wonderful! We've still some equipment to bring up! Will we be near where your Sentinels practice their archery? Dwendel here has a new possible weapon that may be able to fire fifty arrows in a minute . . . if it would just stop doing so in every direction each time." Dwendel, a redheaded gnome clearly much younger than most of his party, looked a bit sheepish. "I have seen to those arrangements as well, High Tinker. If you will follow these Sisters . . ." Making some adjustments, Gelbin did as she bade. The walker strode like a large, flightless bird after the priestesses. Gelbin's companions-the huge sacks each carried clanking ominously-tried to keep up as best they could. Watching the gnomes, Tyrande murmured, "That is nearly everyone but Stormwind." "Yes. For the sake of the others, we will not be able to hold off." The high priestess looked disturbed. "Elune would not have granted me that vision if it did not have significance to the summit. Varian Wrynn must arrive soon." "We can only-" A terrible uproar erupted from the direction of where the gnomes had gone. Without hesitation, both night elves rushed to see what was happening. They found Gelbin and his party confronted by Drukan and several of the Dark Iron dwarves. The dwarves had their axes and blades out and their faces were filled with fury. Gelbin had the arms of his walker extended toward the Dark Iron emissary, but it was clear that the high tinker was not proposing that Drukan shake hands.
Behind Gelbin, the rest of the gnomes had drawn a variety of odd-looking but no less sinister devices. Even Gelbin himself had stashed on his mount a weapon the night elves recognized as Wrenchcalibur-so named in part because it was roughly shaped like the tool. The complex series of cogs, pistons, runes, and levers somehow enabled it to serve as a good mace. The other weapons were not so recognizable to the archdruid and the high priestess. Some resembled blunderbusses, while a few made absolutely no sense. However, in the hands of gnomes, they could only be dangerous . . . even to their wielders. "-yer tongue I'll cut out and slice up fer meat between me bread!" growled Drukan, clearly having uttered several threats already. "And that infernal device ye sit on will make a good still fer strong dwarven spirits!" "I am still very much in the early stages of testing the strength components of this mechanism," Gelbin dryly responded. "It would be fascinating to discover just what force would be required for it to divide you in half!" Drukan's followers muttered, and two started for the gnomes. Drukan angrily waved the pair back. "What is the meaning of this?" Malfurion called out in the hopes of quickly distracting the two sides. The Dark Irons seemed no more pleased to see him than they did the gnomes. A fiery-eyed Drukan waved his axe at Gelbin. "This-this gnome tried tae run me over with his stinkin' toy!" "And I said that the incident was purely accidental!" "Cease yer babbling!" Drukan took a step toward the gnome. Both sides leaned in toward the inevitable struggle. But a brilliant silver glow coming between them startled the two factions. The dwarves and the gnomes pulled back. Tyrande lowered her hands and the glow dissipated. Striding between Drukan and Gelbin, she calmly said, "Now, I am certain that this is a misunderstanding. The high tinker had already admitted that his creation had some corrections that needed to be made, and perhaps should have taken those into account before moving among others. Also, Master Drukan may be wary of his surroundings, but he should understand that he was invited here, and that means that his safety is guaranteed by me and my husband, as it is for all honored guests. I only ask in turn that he respect that this guarantee applies to
the others as well." "Yes . . . yes . . . I suppose I should be a bit more cautious until the controls are fine-tuned," Gelbin responded. He frowned. "Although I am growing dubious about the worth of these arm attachments. . . ." Drukan put away his weapon. With a grunt he said, "The fairness o' the high priestess and the archdruid is known even tae us. The journey's been long. I'll leave it at that." To the gnomes' escort, Tyrande said, "Sisters, I believe you were leading High Tinker Gelbin and his party to their quarters?" They took the hint and immediately guided the gnomes on before hostilities could boil over again. At the same time Drukan gave the high priestess a cursory bow and led his companions off. "And so it begins," the archdruid muttered. "The pretense that all is well with each member of the Alliance is starting to unravel. Even the Dark Irons should have been able to understand that Gelbin meant no harm, and the gnomes should have not become so defensive so quickly. Their nerves were clearly already frayed before their arrival." "No one wishes to show weakness, my love, even if in these extraordinary times it would certainly be reasonable to do so. We already knew how terrible things are in some of the other regions; that they have all come here is a sign that, despite everything, the Alliance holds together." Malfurion shook his head. "But to what extent?" She took his arm and led him off to the temple. "That," the high priestess answered soothingly, "we will find out come the morrow. Until then, there is little point in worrying too much." Malfurion frowned but said nothing. As he and Tyrande headed off, though, he took one last look at the portal. But the one figure he hoped would materialize did not do so . . . and the archdruid wondered if he truly ever would.
10
THE BANQUET
With all having arrived save Stormwind, it behooved Malfurion to indeed see that the summit began. In order to build the mood to a positive level, he and Tyrande had agreed to host a banquet for all the guests. Accustomed to dealing with diurnal races, the night elves held the dinner banquet at sunset in an open area just beyond the confines of Darnassus. With food and drink of countless varieties set before them and the tranquil forest nearby, the rulers, emissaries, and their staffs gradually relaxed. Even Drukan went out of his way and permitted food not brought by his vessel to be served to the Dark Irons . . . but only after his chosen taster had verified that nothing was poisoned. Night elf musicians played not only music composed by their own race but also favored works from among the peoples represented by the guests. There was only one common thread between the songs: all of them had been chosen to stir the heart, to suggest promise in the future. Yet, there were still undertones of trouble brewing. Malfurion had spoken with more than one representative and in the process sought to verify his suspicions concerning the state of each realm. What he had learned at times discouraged him far more than his confident face reflected. Among the dwarves, food was growing scarce, and old, bitter rivalries threatened to engulf the race. To add to the troubles, many of their underground passages had collapsed during the Cataclysm and still needed to be cleared. Thus far, matters had not come to a head, but they needed only one incident to have that happen. The human domains also had to rebuild, and some of them were arguing over where current borders existed. Food and shelter were common problems,
and Tyrande and Malfurion had already promised what aid the night elves could offer. Sisters of Elune and druids now journeyed through each part of the Alliance, using their abilities to heal both the people and nature. But, from what Malfurion had heard, it was not enough. Still, overall, the banquet began to have the effect that he sought. The dwarves did not even argue among themselves, and the gnomes had not set off any disastrous inventions. Seated by Tyrande, Malfurion looked at the empty places to his right. "Genn indicated he would be arriving soon," the high priestess informed her husband. "Eadrik just came with the message." "I thought I saw Eadrik, but I was not certain. There should be-" He hesitated as he caught sight of a shape nearing the banquet. "Odd. Who is that approaching now? It looks like-a draenei!" Tyrande squinted-something she was having to do more and more often- in the direction he was staring. "Not just any draenei! That is Velen." Others began to notice the extremely tall figure-he stood nearly a foot taller than Malfurion-in the golden robes. His skin was alabaster white and his legs ended in thick cloven hooves. The Prophet had silver hair that reached past the shoulders and was set in ornate braids. He also had a matching beard that hung nearly to his waist. Velen's eyes were a brilliant blue and literally glowed. But most arresting of all was the luminous sigil just above his head, a sign of the gift he had been granted from the mystical naaru, energy beings from beyond Azeroth, beyond the otherworldly realm of Outland. They were creatures with an affinity to the Holy Light, of which Velen was now the chief prophet of the draenei. Other draenei wielded the power of the gift, but none so much as the figure before the assembly. In fact, the Light not only emanated from the sigil but at certain times almost seemed to faintly surround the august arrival . . . though it could have also merely been some trick of the eye. Velen himself radiated timelessness, with only wrinkles around his ancient eyes. However, up close, one could see minute cracks in his alabaster skin, as if he were a statue hewed aeons ago. Malfurion did not know how old the draenei was. Older than any night elf alive, that much was true. Even Drukan stood as Velen joined the banquet. Almost as one, the guests dipped their heads or bowed in respect. There was something about the draenei
that spoke of an inner peace and knowledge that most could only dream of attaining. Small wonder, since Velen was not only leader of his people but a priest as well. The draenei raised the crystalline head of a long, purple staff in Malfurion's and Tyrande's direction. Both the large crystal and the smaller one at the bottom of the staff briefly shimmered brighter. "Hail to you, Archdruid and High Priestess! Forgive this intrusion. . . ." "The presence of the Prophet is never an intrusion," Tyrande returned as solemnly, speaking to the others as well as their new guest, "and Velen himself is ever welcome here as a friend to all. We are all grateful for the aid he and the draenei gave us during the recent conflict with the demons of the Burning Legion." The priest bowed his head. "It is we the draenei who must thank the Alliance for taking us in, and even more so for standing against the foulness of the Burning Legion! Do not think so little of that! Never had there been a world that could stave off the demons not merely once, but more!" Tyrande once more acknowledged this for all in attendance, but insisted more personally to the Prophet, "The final victory might not have been ours if not for you and your people, Velen. None here will deny that, either." "I am honored that you think so, but know that we will always be indebted to Azeroth. Thus, I come to promise you now that the draenei will do all we can to help the various lands of the Alliance in whatever capacity we may best." There was startled rumbling from the attendees, the night elves included. Malfurion leaned forward. "Your people are not returning to Outland? We just assumed . . ." Velen smiled as if well aware that he would be faced with this very question. "Some have been sent back to revitalize our civilization there, but the rest of us will remain here on Azeroth for so long as we are needed." The high priestess looked around at the others. "I think that I speak for all of us when I say that this is a noble gesture for which we can only express again our own gratitude." Most of the other representatives of the Alliance murmured their agreement. The Dark Irons were the only ones to look not entirely satisfied with this revelation. Velen looked pleased at this overall acceptance. "Please, join us, revered one," Tyrande added, immediately signaling the
servers to add a seat next to Malfurion and her. The two made certain that none of the other representatives would be deprived of space for this unexpected addition. "I would be happy to join all my friends here. A little water is all I need." Despite that insistence, Tyrande had some food and wine also brought. Some slight surprise at the announcement aside, the draenei was a welcome guest. The banquet settled down. The mood lightened. Tyrande exchanged a hopeful look with Malfurion. From their right, just beyond Velen, Kurdran let out a hearty laugh at something the draenei said, drawing the night elves' attention. The Prophet looked mildly amused at the effect his words had had on the dwarf. Kurdran turned to tell one of his countrymen something in regard to what he had heard from Velen-and paused to warily eye a party approaching. At the same time, the musicians, evidently also noting the newcomers, paused. Genn Greymane had arrived at last. The king of Gilneas was flanked by four of his people, three men and one woman. Eadrik was one of the escort, and he at present listened to something that Genn whispered. As before, the Gilneans looked like any other humans, though Genn's escort obviously consisted of seasoned fighters. If not for his confident stride and bearing, Genn might have simply been one more member of the band; he wore little ornamentation marking his regal status. The most evident sign of his rank was the Gilnean crest embossed on his shirt just over the heart, which Genn absently touched as he entered the gathering. The downfall of his kingdom had very much humbled the once-haughty monarch. If there was anything to distinguish the Gilneans from most other humans, it was a wariness in their gazes as they neared. It was not a look of distrust but rather of defiance. Yet, defiance not against anyone in particular but at the world in general. As they reached the center of the banquet, Genn raised his hand shoulder high. The other Gilneans stopped. The king took a half a dozen steps more, then halted in front of the night elves. "My apologies. The delay was unavoidable." His eyes fixed on Velen. "You must be Prophet Velen. I've heard much of you. I wasn't aware you'd be here. I
am Genn Greymane." The Prophet bowed his head. "Greetings, King of Gilneas. I am also familiar with you." Tyrande and Malfurion rose, the former declaring, "Welcome, Genn Greymane! Please take your place with us!" "Before I do, I must say something to all here." His announcement spurred glances of curiosity and concern among the other leaders and emissaries. Malfurion fought off a frown. "Please speak, Genn," the archdruid finally encouraged. "We will be glad to listen." Malfurion's declaration quieted the others, though some, especially the Dark Irons, still watched with wariness and concern. The king nodded. "I'll make this short. I made some terrible decisions years ago. I abandoned the Alliance for what I thought was the right course for my people. That proved to be a sorry mistake." He cleared his throat. "What I'm saying is that I thank you all for giving us this second chance." With that, Genn bowed to the other guests, then led his party where they were to be seated. Rather than prolong what had clearly been an awkward moment for the human, Tyrande immediately signaled for the musicians to begin anew. She also made certain that the Gilneans were quickly fed and that the other guests had more drink and food brought to them. The meal progressed. Personal conversations began to develop and a serious note crept into some aspects of the scene. Kurdran had shifted over to Tervosh to speak about something that caused the archmage to frown but nod. Across from them, Drukan watched with narrowed eyes, then returned to his food. A moment later, though, he rose and, to their surprise, went to speak privately with the high tinker. "Do you think these conversations are a sign of hope or fragmentation?" Malfurion quietly asked his mate, his serene face belying his concern. "Each of their lands is trying to recover, as even we are. They are no doubt attempting to see what they might be able to gain from others. In a sense, that might bring them together . . . but only if they do not feel that they have to sacrifice too much in turn." "Which means that you think these conversations are both." Tyrande touched his hand. "Yes, my love, unfortunately I do." She smiled
slightly. "But at least they are talking, and that is something to work on-" He noticed her look past him. "What is it?" "There are two Sentinels seeking our attention." The archdruid casually turned in that direction. Seeking their attention was an understatement; clearly only the fact that so many officials from the Alliance were gathered here prevented the pair from racing toward its leaders. The two had purposely kept where the vast majority of the banquet could not see them. Both gripped their weapons, frequently looking over their shoulders at something behind them. "Stormwind, perhaps?" he asked. The high priestess rose. "If so, from their stances, it cannot be good news." He surveyed their guests, then muttered, "I am coming with you." She made no move to stop him. Velen looked up at her as she stepped away, nodding as if to show that if they needed his support-whatever the matter-he would give it. Some of the other guests watched as they departed, but the night elves pretended not to notice. Moving with measured steps, they finally reached the two Sentinels. And there they discovered that behind the pair stood at least half a dozen more, along with a very dour Maiev. Tyrande wasted no time: "Speak." But it was Maiev, not the lead Sentinel, who spoke. Stepping forward, she answered, "High Priestess . . . there is a body." The archdruid looked grim. "Show us." Tyrande gave orders to one of her senior priestesses to take care of the guests. That problem dealt with, she and Malfurion followed the others from the vicinity of the banquet. Maiev and the Sentinels headed directly for the temple. "My decision," the Watcher informed them. "I thought it best." "You did right," the high priestess acknowledged. In one of the lesser-used inner chambers, they at last came across two Sentinels guarding a night elf-size form covered in cloth. "Who?" Tyrande finally asked, unwilling to wait even long enough for the makeshift shroud to be drawn away. Maiev removed her helmet and tucked it under her arm. Jarod's sister stared
directly at Malfurion. "A Highborne. The one, I am told, you were informed went missing." One of the Sentinels uncovered the face. As Maiev had said, it was a Highborne. Malfurion knew immediately which one too. "Thera'brin . . . ," the archdruid rasped. "Where was he discovered?" "Not all that far from where I and the other Watchers practice," Maiev responded with a scowl. Tyrande looked grave. "He did not die by accident, did he?" Maiev reached down and pulled the cloth further. The savage gaps just under the Highborne's chin greeted the shocked duo. "Only if he decided to slit his own throat twice-the second for pleasure, I assume"-she straightened -"and made sure that a missive we found with him remained pinned to his body when he fell." She spoke in a clinical tone, as if describing the general shape and appearance of a stone rather than the murder of one of their own. It did not at all surprise either Malfurion or Tyrande to hear her speak so: Maiev was ever precise, ever to the point, when performing her duties. "What did this note say?" the archdruid demanded, a new chill running through him. Maiev was prepared. She handed him a ragged piece of parchment stained in great part with the unfortunate Thera'brin's blood. On it had been scrawled in what also appeared to be the mage's bodily fluids a message written in a longdisused style of night elf script that stirred memories of the days when ZinAzshari was still the capital and the evil of Queen Azshara was as yet unknown. Suffer Not Traitors . . . "We knew that there would be those who would never forgive them," Tyrande said. "But we thought that they would listen to reason, at least up to the point of not going through with such a heinous act." The archdruid returned his gaze to Maiev. "Found near where you practice?" "Yes. Either someone thought him a gift or they decided that the Watchers could be blamed." Her declaration was not without merit. Maiev and her Watchers were among the many uncomfortable with the thought of the Highborne's eventual return to the fold.
"This will not remain a secret," Tyrande said. "And should not." Malfurion agreed. "More important, we must find the assassins and deal with them before this grows worse. The timing can be no coincidence! This is not just about the Highborne; this is meant to cause chaos during the summit." "You are right, my love. I will ask Shandris-" Suddenly kneeling before Tyrande, Maiev bent her head and declared, "Let me uncover the culprits! I know the facts better than any! I have investigated the body for all clues and studied the area in which it was found! There is nothing more anyone else could do. Give this matter to me! I swear I will do all in my power to see that those who would seek to foment unrest among our kind will be dealt with!" Tyrande looked to Malfurion, who nodded. The high priestess gently put a hand on Maiev's shoulder. The kneeling night elf looked up, gaze intent. "I can think of few more dedicated to our people and their needs. Take command of this investigation, Maiev, and do it with my blessing." Some of the Sentinels did not look entirely pleased with this choice but held their peace. Maiev looked as if Tyrande had granted her the greatest desire of her life. She rose and saluted the pair. "I will see this through, whatever sacrifice it must take!" "I insist you take care, Maiev." Jarod's sister grudgingly nodded, but her eyes did not show agreement. Both Tyrande and Malfurion were aware how focused Maiev could be when set upon a mission. In this case they needed that focus, and thus neither said more to discourage the warden from following through as she might need. "The Highborne will want Thera'brin's body returned," Malfurion commented. "I think it best if I lead that effort. They already believe that the rest of us would rather see them wiped from the face of Azeroth; this will hardly improve their disposition." "Do as you say." The high priestess touched his cheek. "But take care around them." "You know that I will." Maiev bowed her head again. "With your permission, I will begin this hunt immediately." Tyrande nodded. Replacing her helmet, Maiev silently departed.
"I will send four Sentinels with you when you go to the Highborne," Tyrande informed her husband. "They will act as bearers for the body." "Let me seek the aid of some of my calling. It might not be wise for the Highborne to be confronted by armed fighters just now." She saw the wisdom in his choice. "Are you going to leave immediately?" "Not just yet. I wish Velen's opinion on this and some other matters. I had not expected his arrival, but it may be that it was fortuitous. We will need his steady demeanor to keep temperatures from boiling over once all know of the murder. Every distrust among the various factions will suddenly rise to the forefront." It was decided that the Sentinels would remain on guard here for as long as needed. Tyrande also summoned another pair of priestesses versed in the preserving arts to do what they could to maintain the freshness of the body. Aware that they could not let the Highborne wait long before being told of the discovery, the archdruid and the high priestess quickly returned to the banquet. They had feared that their absence might have caused a wariness to settle over the other participants, but, to their relief, everyone still seemed at ease. Part of that likely had to do with Velen, who had departed his seat to speak with the Dark Irons. What matter there was that would bring the draenei and the dwarves together, neither night elf could say, but Velen had somehow managed not only to keep Drukan distracted but also to make him feel cheered. "The Light truly works in amazing ways," Malfurion murmured to his wife. "And Velen is clearly schooled in the art of diplomacy." Tyrande hesitated as she saw another Sentinel approaching. "More news . . ." The Sentinel saluted and immediately said, "High Priestess, Stormwind has arrived." The news brought both relief and concern to Malfurion and his mate. Tyrande asked, "How long ago?" "When I left with this news, they had just disembarked. I searched for you here, but could not find you." The high priestess eyed her husband. "The attendants on duty at the portal have orders to guide the party to their quarters, but I should go and greet Varian. . . ." To their other side, Genn Greymane's voice suddenly rose above the din. He had an audience that consisted of most of Kurdran's party. Genn, clearly much
more relaxed due to not only the acceptance the others had shown but also the dwarven ale he had just finished downing, had begun regaling the others with some of his past battles against the Horde. "The key was to keep our front united," the king was saying as Malfurion and Tyrande moved on toward Velen. "Split us apart, and we'd all be crow food! Each man knew that to falter would mean his comrades dying for his mistake, and none would have that! We let out the Gilnean battle cry-" "Consisting of a pleading for mercy so great the orcs no doubt turned from the lot of you in disgust," said a mocking voice. The effect of the words on Genn Greymane was immediate. He leapt up from the table, in his fury sweeping aside the food and drink before him without care to where or upon whom it landed. A dark cast fell upon his features, and for a moment he seemed to swell and even begin to change. "Who dares spout such a monstrous slur upon me and Gilneas? Who?" His outraged gaze swiftly pored over each and every person seated there, seeking the culprit. Most simply stared back, as stunned as he at the savage pronouncement. A few looked about anxiously. And a few, such as Malfurion and Tyrande, looked from Genn Greymane to the direction from where the speaker actually stood. Malfurion took a step toward the commanding figure, but the high priestess stayed him with a hand. The king of Gilneas caught their movement. He followed their eyes to his accuser. "You . . ." "And having swayed the orcs so eloquently, you no doubt did as all brave Gilneans do so well: skulked away and hid until the battle was over. . . ." Genn clearly desired to lunge for his counterpart's throat. His hands grasped at the air as if already crushing in the windpipe. Yet, somehow he managed to stay his ground and simply growl. For his reaction, he received nothing but a look of contempt from the newcomer, who then, with a much more polite manner, turned to the banquet's hosts and bowed. "High Priestess Tyrande. Archdruid Malfurion. It's a pleasure to see you again," Varian Wrynn calmly remarked.
11
DARKENED HEARTS
"Never-never have I nor any of my warriors acted so basely!" Genn declared, visibly struggling with himself. "The bravery of Gilneas-" "'Bravery'?" Varian Wrynn cut in. Tall, commanding, his features handsome in a brooding manner, the king of Stormwind was to his own people already a hero out of legend. He had, in point of fact, lived a remarkable and dangerous life that had not only for years separated him from those he most loved, but also left him for a time bereft of his memory. His trials made for rousing tales that bards could sing before swooning ladies. And his two long scars, one running across his cheeks and the bridge of his nose and the other descending down the left side of his face from the forehead to the cheek-both legacies of the several times he had barely escaped death-only added more flavor to those stories . . . stories for which Varian himself had no taste whatsoever. "The definition must be different in Gilneas from what it is in most other lands . . . the very opposite, I'd say." The insinuation that Genn and his people were utter cowards proved too much for the elder monarch. His expression darkened. Some of those in his retinue growled low and seemed ready to move toward Varian, but Genn staved off their advance with a sharp glance. Malfurion moved to intervene. "King Varian! We had no news of you and your retinue arriving below. . . ." "I preferred it that way," the former gladiator answered, acting now as if Genn did not even exist. Varian shoved aside an unruly lock of dark brown hair. The eyes of a hunter surveyed each and every person in sight, Varian Wrynn ever instinctively marking those around him by their potential threat.
The archdruid purposely stood between the pair. "And your son? Is Anduin with you?" "Naturally." Varian said it with such an absolute tone that Malfurion felt slightly foolish for asking, though many monarchs would have left their only heirs in the supposed safety of home rather than bring them on any sort of journey. The king briefly tilted his head back. The night elf looked beyond Varian to where four members of the king's personal guard flanked a slightly shorter figure dressed in the regal blue and gold of Stormwind. Prince Anduin, his own blond hair cut short, bowed his head to the archdruid. He wore a high-collared shirt covered by mail that was in turn draped by the golden lion head crest of his kingdom. The prince was not armed save for a dagger at his belt, but with so many guards in Stormwind's party, his safety would have been ensured in almost any place, much less Darnassus. In contrast to his father, who was every bit the fighter, Anduin was a studious youth. Moreover, there was an aura of selflessness that reminded Malfurion of only one other person present. Without thinking, Malfurion glanced over his shoulder at Velen. To his surprise, the Prophet's eyes registered the same intense interest in the human boy. Velen sensed exactly what Malfurion did . . . perhaps more. Genn was taking long, deep breaths that were designed to bring his temper back under control. Varian looked unimpressed by the other king's efforts. The archdruid continued to try to defuse the tension between them. "King Varian. Forgive us for not being there to greet you! You, your son, and your companions are welcome to join the banquet immediately if you wish! Your seats await you, and food and drink will be shortly coming-" "I'm not inclined to stay here," the monarch of Stormwind bluntly replied. "I sailed to Darnassus for the sake of the Alliance, not him." He indicated Genn. "If it's all the same to you, Archdruid, the journey was a tiring one, so I think I'll retire already. . . ." Genn moved toward his counterpart again. In a lower tone he said, "Varian . . . let us talk. I did what I thought was best for my people; you must understand that! I never realized the full folly of my arrogance when I chose to build the wall and what it would mean, cutting off Gilneas from the outside. . . ." Varian's gaze never left the archdruid. He said nothing to Genn.
This only stirred the king of Gilneas to further effort. "I swear an oath that we will be as brothers to all other members of the Alliance, that we will give aid in whatever manner needed! Gilneas will not shirk its duty! There will be no more loyal member, especially to its fellow human realm, Stormwind-" "Stormwind wants no such brother at its back!" Varian burst out. "Varian . . . " Malfurion murmured. The younger king's body shook from fury. He lowered his gaze, staring bitterly at Genn from under his brow. "I didn't ask to wear the mantle of responsibility, to become the bearer of humanity's standard! It was enough to rule Stormwind and protect my son! But I did it because I had no choice! Who else was there? Not Gilneas! Stormwind, with Theramore at its side, has had to face the dangers . . . and now you want to come in under our wing and pretend you'll stand with us this time?" "We will stand-" "You needn't worry yourself, Greymane! Stormwind and I have done without you, without Gilneas . . . and certainly without the worgen . . . and we'll continue to do so! What you truly desire is redemption for your traitorous crimes, which you'll not get from me!" "Gilneas was a sovereign nation. We seceded during a time of peace, not war, and for good reasons. You know that. As for the coming vote-" However, Varian turned his back on the other human. "Excuse me, Archdruid and High Priestess. I will see you later. . . ." Before Malfurion could even respond, Varian whirled back the way he had come and stalked off. In his wake followed his retinue. Malfurion looked at Tyrande, who had already signaled a pair of priestesses to hurry after King Varian. As she focused in Malfurion's direction, her eyes widened. A low, animalistic snarl escaped from where Genn stood. The archdruid immediately returned his attention to the human. Genn bared his teeth in a feral grin that stretched far beyond where human limits should have allowed. His body swelled. . . . And then, again, the human regained control of himself. "F-Forgive me, Archdruid," the sweating figure muttered. "I should've known better. I should've." "I suggest you return to your seat and-"
"No. No, I can't." Genn gestured to Eadrik and the other Gilneans. With Genn in their lead, the party silently departed for the forest. The other guests murmured among themselves. Tyrande indicated for the musicians to play again, but it was clear that the banquet would soon be winding down. The confrontation had eradicated the hopeful mood of the participants, a situation that Malfurion would have to work hard to correct. However, as he turned to discuss this with his mate, he noticed that one member of Stormwind's party had not left: Anduin, who was at this moment quietly speaking with Velen. As the night elves approached the pair, they heard the draenei saying, " . . . and what you know of the Light is indeed true, but that is only the slightest of its many facets, young Anduin! To fully appreciate the wonder of the Light, you must look at it from the perspective that best lets you see its full place in the universe and how it may become part of our very being! Such requires patience and learning. . . ." "I can do that, but what I want-" "Prince Anduin!" Two of the king's personal guard had returned. Their flushed faces and hurried movements bespoke of the intense reprimand their monarch had no doubt given them upon discovering that his son was not with the party. The two burly soldiers barged past the night elves and came at their prince from opposing sides. The one who had called to the prince-a hardened veteran with a nose that looked as if it had been broken more than once in battle-reached for Anduin, who did not hide his frustration as he rose to face the guards. "Prince Anduin! Your father was most upset when he discovered that you'd neglected to follow us! The king has commanded that you come immediately!" Anduin looked as if he were ready to snap something at the unfortunate guards-who all knew were only doing their duty and likely feared being punished-but held back. With a resigned nod, the prince joined his two keepers. He briefly turned to face the night elves and the others, bowing to each group. Only then did he silently gesture to the two anxious men to lead him to his father. "Young Anduin has a quiet strength," Velen commented once the boy was gone. "A pity his father seeks to cage him as he does himself."
"Varian nearly lost him more than once," the archdruid remarked. "His fear that Anduin might vanish or be taken is not unfounded." Malfurion frowned deeply. "Nor are his harsh words to Genn Greymane, I am sorry to say." "Genn will make amends for all," Tyrande interjected. "You know that as well as I. We already know how much he sacrificed to get matters to this point." "But will it be worth it in the end? They nearly attacked one another. Genn came very close to losing control of himself, and with some reason!" "Perhaps we should discuss this at another time," the high priestess commented. "Velen, if you could-" But to the surprise of both night elves, the Prophet had surreptitiously departed the conversation, almost as if he knew the two were about to enter subjects best discussed purely between them. "Well, we can trust Velen, that is for certain," Malfurion murmured. Then, sobering, he added, "Tyrande, before you speak, I have to tell you-" "He is the one, Mal." "I know Elune tells you so and I understand that it should be so, but you saw him! Varian could perhaps be the leader the Alliance needs, yet he also stands a very good chance of becoming the one who further guides it to disaster!" "Varian is troubled, I agree-" "More than troubled, though with good cause." The archdruid tugged on his beard in contemplation. "And his disdain for Genn strikes me as being as much for himself as it is for the king of Gilneas. There was that in his tone that hinted more of self-reproach. . . ." "I heard that, also." The high priestess casually glanced to her side. "The others are beginning to leave. The banquet is over." "The banquet was a debacle. The others here have seen Varian proclaim the worgen unfit to be part of the Alliance! We cannot let that notion stand. . . ." "I will go speak with the others. Perhaps you can do something with Varian." "Perhaps." Malfurion could not hide his doubt concerning such a hope. She put her hand on his. "Elune will guide us. Have faith." He grunted. "I of all people should, should I not?" "Go. Speak with Varian." Malfurion knew better than to argue when she used that tone. They kissed, then the archdruid, with a bow to the remaining guests, followed after the king of Stormwind.
To someone who had slept in bug-infested cages and grimy, blood-soaked cells during his days as a slave and gladiator, the woodland quarters offered by his hosts seemed far too soft in comparison. Even Varian's chambers back home were not nearly so calm, so peaceful. The king considered departing Darnassus for the relative familiarity of his confining quarters aboard ship, but respected his hosts enough not to insult them . . . or at least not insult them any more than he had with his denunciation of Genn Greymane.
Varian had no regrets there. In fact, he had a rather great satisfaction. He knew that he had behaved badly, but in Greymane he had found an outlet for some of the fire ever raging within him. There was a knock at the door. The night elves had gone out of their way to make their guests feel at home, and so the chambers set aside for Varian and his retinue were fairly human in design and accommodations. Unfortunately, they still had that "nature" feel he always associated with those of the archdruid's race. Far better were the oppressive stone walls of the keep. One of the guards cautiously opened the door. Even in Darnassus, one did not take chances. Varian had already caught wind of something amiss, something that had happened just before his arrival. Anduin and the two bodyguards sent to retrieve him entered. Varian, his heart lightening, went straight to his son. "You had me worried!" To the two men, he growled, "Let this not happen again! Should any harm come to my son, I will have-" "Leave it be, Father." Anduin spoke quietly, ever calmly, but still he did momentarily what no one else could: silence the king. Recovering, Varian said, "Anduin, you must understand! You are the prince of Stormwind! Nowhere, not even here, should be considered safe enough for you to go wandering off! You always need at least a guard with you." "Yes. I'm not very good at defending myself," the prince retorted. "I'm not the great warrior you are. You and Magni have already seen how badly I handle a sword, even in practice." "I didn't mean-" The prince sighed. It was a sound Varian heard often and usually because of something he had done out of concern for his son. "No, you don't. You never do, Father. I'm back, safe and sound. As usual."
"Anduin-" Against any foe, the king could stand resolute in his next move. Against his son, he constantly floundered. "Good night, Father." The prince walked on, following his guards to the room set aside for him. As unsettling as the conversation no doubt had been to their guards, Anduin had actually kept it from getting worse by cutting it off. Varian knew that- could even appreciate it-but that still did not ease the sting of his son's obvious reprimand. Now the serenity of the night elven dwelling finally proved too much for him. "Stay here," he commanded the guards, aware as much as they that he was placing them in a similar position as when Anduin had not remained with the party. "I need to walk." They knew better than to argue. No longer paying them any heed, Varian strode out. However, like in his quarters, the tranquility of the capital did nothing to ease his heart. Instead, he stared at the forest beyond. His pace quickened. The wilderness beckoned. "King Varian! I was just coming to see you." The human hid his disappointment, though for a moment his eyes lingered longingly on the trees beyond the city. "Archdruid," he responded, finally acknowledging his host. "My thanks for our quarters. They will do just fine." "Which is why you had to flee them at the first chance," the night elf returned with a slight smile. "Please. I will not stand on ceremony with you. Call me Malfurion." "Then I'll ask you to call me Varian." "As you wish. If you do not mind, I hoped to have a word with you." The lord of Stormwind exhaled. "My sincerest apologies for ruining your banquet." "The banquet is of no consequence. The gathering is. You appreciate bluntness, Varian. I am more concerned about your confrontation with Genn." The mere mention of Greymane's name stirred the embers within. Varian's pulse pounded. "I'd prefer not to speak about that, Malfurion." The night elf would not be dissuaded. "Varian, I must ask you to consider everything that happens before, during, and after the summit in light of what Azeroth has become due to the Cataclysm. Each choice we make has to be
carefully weighed." "You're referring to the induction." "Of course. I hope you will see reason-" The king no longer had any desire to head to the forest. Is there nowhere I can be free? Malfurion was clearly intent on pressing forward with his point. Varian could see only one way to at least end the conversation. "I'll give Genn and the worgen a fair consideration. You have my word." Malfurion heard the finality in his voice and wisely accepted the answer as it was. "Thank you, Varian. That is all I can ask-" Another figure intruded upon them. Varian fought down his impatience with the seemingly never-ending situation. His trained eyes took in the newcomer, who, though a night elf, was dressed in a colorful outfit that the king thought Malfurion surely also found gaudy. "Archdruid Stormrage," the other greeted solemnly. "Var'dyn." Varian's sharp ears caught a slight inflection in the night elf's voice, as if the archdruid not only knew what this other figure wanted . . . but dreaded it for some reason. Exactly what the other elf was finally registered with Varian. He recalled the reports. So this is a Highborne. The Highborne barely seemed to notice the human. The king recalled the apparent arrogance of Var'dyn's kind. He also remembered that they were magi . . . and reckless ones at that. The archdruid said, "I thank you for your time and your reply, Varian. I look forward to speaking with you further." The king took advantage of the situation. "Naturally. Forgive me now; I must be going. Good evening." He did not even acknowledge the Highborne as he left, thinking that the other elf did not deserve any better than he gave. Varian gratefully departed the pair, silently wishing he had never sailed from Stormwind. A slight movement in the trees nearby caught the corner of his eye. Varian did not focus on it, aware that by the time he turned the source would be gone from sight. Besides, the king was fairly certain just what had been lurking at the forest's edge.
His scowl deepened. Under his breath, he muttered, "Damned worgen."
Var'dyn did not speak until the human was long gone. Malfurion, aware of the news he had not yet had the opportunity to present to the Highborne, solemnly waited. The archdruid wanted to hear Var'dyn out to see how much the latter knew.
"I am here concerning the disappearance," Var'dyn bluntly stated. "You know that." Malfurion waited for the Highborne to continue, but that apparently was all the mage wished to say for the moment. Instead, Var'dyn looked expectantly at the archdruid. There is no use delaying the inevitable, Malfurion thought. "So, Maiev Shadowsong has informed the Highborne of everything already-" He got no further: Var'dyn's perplexed expression told him that the mage had no idea whatsoever about anything concerning Maiev-or her discovery. "What should we know about, Archdruid?" "Thera'brin is dead. Murdered." Var'dyn stiffened. "Tell me." Malfurion did, leaving out no detail. The spellcaster remained stone-faced throughout. The only true sign of his growing fury was his hands, which folded into tight fists and stayed so. "The body will be returned to us immediately," Var'dyn declared when Malfurion finished. His voice held no emotion. He stared past the other night elf, as if seeing something far, far away. "There will be no further desecration of it by anyone for any reason." "That was the intention. Maiev-" "Yes . . . the warden. She can continue with her investigation, but she will not speak with us. If there is anything we learn, we will relate it to you, Archdruid. I leave it to you to let her know what she needs." It was hardly the most logical system, but the Highborne were not very trusting-and, at the moment, Malfurion could not entirely blame them. "I will speak to her as soon as I can," he promised Var'dyn. The mage did not answer, his gaze once again distant. The edge of his mouth twitched. Malfurion grew disturbed. "Var'dyn. I swear that Thera'brin's death will be investigated thoroughly and
the assassins brought to justice! I only ask that the Highborne have some patience-" "We cannot afford patience, Archdruid," Var'dyn blurted. He finally looked directly at Malfurion again, and in those eyes the archdruid read a sense of dread. "You see. I did not come to speak with you about Thera'brin. Another of my people has gone missing."
12
THE HORDE STRIKES
There was still no word from Darnassus, although Haldrissa hoped for it soon. Nevertheless, she went on with her own plans to organize against this latest Horde incursion. Of necessity, that meant a swift, simple ceremony for poor Xanon. The commander said appropriate words for her dead officer, then turned over the final moments to Kara'din, one of the two druids assigned to her here in Ashenvale as part of some project of the high priestess and the archdruid's to bring the night elf race closer together. The other, Parsis, was somewhere in the forest behind them, wandering the Emerald Dream or something-Haldrissa was not quite sure. She was as devoted to the ways of her people as most night elves, but the druids were a lot that sometimes baffled and frustrated her. They often seemed to be half-asleep-or more, even-and spoke about aspects of the world that had no practical use for a soldier. As soon as the funeral finished, Haldrissa headed back. Denea followed close. Although her second obeyed every order she gave without question, Haldrissa could sense a distance growing between them. She was certain that Denea and some of the other officers blamed their commander for not only Xanon's death but the other losses as well. Of course, most of her officers had not been out in the field as long as Haldrissa, so for the moment she forgave their naïveté. If they survived life half as long as she had, they would learn. But will they get that opportunity? she suddenly asked herself. This latest intrusion by the Horde looked to be on a far greater scale than in the past. "Denea . . ." "Yes, Commander?"
"I want four scouts to take their hippogryphs toward the northeast. Not so far as we journeyed. From the air, they should be able to see enough even then." "Yes, Commander." "Oh, and how soon will the full mounted contingent be ready?" "We can ride first thing tomorrow." Although Denea tried to maintain a steadiness in her voice, a hint of anticipation crept into it. Haldrissa made certain that her own voice remained calm and in command. "If the scouts return with their report by then, we shall. We do not move until then." "With your permission, then, I will go get the scouts." Haldrissa's nod was all Denea needed. She rushed off, obviously determined to see to it that the Sentinels did indeed ride off the next day. I remember being so eager once, the senior officer thought . . . then immediately cursed herself for such maudlin notions. The only difference between Denea and her was that Haldrissa had the millennia of experience to know how to temper eagerness with caution. A commander's trait. A low rumble stirred her. From the west trundled in a short train of supply wagons guided by an armed Sentinel escort. The captain in charge of the escort anxiously peered around, not a good sign at all. Haldrissa immediately headed to her. The captain saluted. "Commander Haldrissa?" "Yes. Did something happen?" She surveyed the wagons but saw nothing out of the ordinary. Nothing, that is, save that the last wagon had an extra burden draped out of the back. A large, winged form. The stench of decay, so familiar to the veteran officer, was strong even before Haldrissa reached the wagon. "We found the hippogryph about a day out," the captain reported as she dismounted. "Been dead for some time." Wordlessly, Haldrissa rushed to the huge corpse. She wanted to deny it for what-and who-it was, but as she neared, the distinctive markings verified the worst. It was definitely Windstorm. And that meant only the worst where Aradria and the message for Darnassus were concerned. "He had many wounds, mostly from arrows, but a great axe is what finally
did him in," the captain concluded. Haldrissa peered into the wagon. Windstorm's corpse was set against a number of barrels. Of Aradria Cloudflyer there was no sign. "The courier! Where is she?" "We found only the hippogryph, not her, though there were traces of blood elsewhere that could have been from the courier. We did discover several dead orcs-" "Never mind the orcs! What of the courier?" Cowed by Haldrissa's fury, the young officer blurted, "As I said, she was nowhere to be found, but-" "'Nowhere to be found' . . . " The commander took heart from that. She saw the scene playing out. Windstorm, sorely wounded in the sky, had no doubt brought his rider to the ground so that she could escape on foot with the pouch while he sacrificed himself to keep the orc scouts at bay. That the orcs had penetrated so very deep bothered her, but Aradria's escape made up for that. There were places en route where an expert courier such as Aradria could gain another mount. The captain had been saying something, but Haldrissa had not been paying attention. "What was that?" "I said that we also found this there." Haldrissa herself could not see it, but her expression must have been terrible to see, for the captain suddenly gaped at her. The tattered pouches gave testament to the folly of the commander's earlier hopes. Aradria had not gotten away. She would have never abandoned the missive. Either the orcs had disposed of her body or some beast had dragged it away. And Darnassus still had no idea what was happening in Ashenvale. Denea. Abandoning the confused captain, Haldrissa hurried after her second. Denea already had scouts preparing for the mission. However, rather than sending them ahead as originally planned, this time she would have all of them wait until she had had four more copies of the previous message written. Then the scouts would head to Darnassus. Denea would just have to bridle her eagerness to hunt down the orcs for another day or so. Matters could wait that long, at least, so Haldrissa believed. "Denea!" she shouted. Her second stood with the four scouts, evidently just
about to send them off. "Denea!" Her voice did not carry enough. Eager to march off herself, the younger officer signaled permission for the four scouts and their hippogryphs to depart. The group quickly rose into the air. Denea finally turned in response to Haldrissa's shouting. "Commander?" "Signal them to return! Aradria never made it! I want all four of them to head to Darnassus instead!" She had considered using owls to carry the messages; however, not only were the hippogryphs much faster, but the riders could also defend the missives. The other Sentinel rushed to one of the signal horns set aside for summoning the warriors to action. It was their only hope of recalling the hippogryph riders in time. Denea put the curved horn to her mouth and blew as hard as she could. The blare caused every Sentinel to pause in what she or he was doing. Too late, Haldrissa realized that many of them, already preparing for the deadly march, might think the call to action had come sooner than expected. But if the horn stirred the post for the wrong reasons, at least she saw that it served its other purpose. The lead scout glanced over her shoulder, saw Denea gesturing, and had the party turn about. "Praise Elune . . . " Haldrissa moved forward to meet the descending hippogryphs. She had a few instructions to pass on to the scouts before hurrying to write out the new messages to Darnassus. A cry above made her stumble. Near her, Denea let loose with an oath. One of the scouts dropped limply from her mount, plunging to the ground as the other night elves stared in horror. The fletchings of two arrows thrust up over her back as she landed. Haldrissa had fought too many battles not to recognize the Horde markings. The sky was suddenly filled with arrows. At first the commander thought that the archers had miscalculated the distance, for the bolts flew too high to properly descend upon the Sentinels below. Only when one of the other scouts and her mount were struck several times did Haldrissa see the terrible logic: it was not the encampment that was the immediate target; it was the scouts. The Horde was already prepared for her plan. As the arrows brought down the second scout, other shouts arose ahead. Haldrissa saw several warriors pointing to the east.
Smoke rose from two other locations. She did not have to guess its origins. Two of the outposts lay in those directions. "Sentinels, form ranks!" Denea cried out. "Prepare for imminent attack!" As Sentinels-including blue-armored huntresses with shields and glaives- raced to obey, Haldrissa stirred in frustration. Those were orders she should have given. She eyed the forest beyond, wondering how the Horde had gotten so near in such numbers. They had clearly made several forays into the area to have such an excellent understanding of their surroundings. But she also knew the terrain well. "Denea! Twenty to the southeast edge of the post! They will have to come from there! I want a mounted force of huntresses with shields and lances readied!" With the Horde presence in Ashenvale having grown over the past months, General Shandris had decided to include lancers-a seldom-utilized aspect of the night elf armies since the end of the War of the Ancients-in the Sentinels' arsenal of weapons. "Get the other -" A hippogryph's squawk cut her off. Another of the winged creatures dropped. Her rider, a shaft through her arm, managed to jump off before the creature hit. The last of the scouts managed to land. However, even the ground proved no sanctuary. More arrows flew, these designed to target those within the encampment and, Haldrissa saw, especially the area where the hippogryphs were kept. Worse, the landing scouts had given the archers a fairly good notion of just where that was. Someone among the attackers had planned very, very well. "Get the hippogryphs to cover!" Haldrissa ordered. She drew her glaive. There was still no sign of the invaders themselves, but that would surely change in moments. Haldrissa had to use what little time remained to her advantage. Her gaze fell upon Kara'din, who ran from wounded fighter to wounded fighter, using his druidic powers to heal them as best he could. The commander chose to leave Kara'din to his own devices for the moment as additional concerns occurred to her. "Archers, form ranks!" She saw that some had already begun to, but as a whole they were not moving as quickly as Haldrissa would have hoped. "Northeast, east, southeast! Twenty paces from the gate!" Of necessity, the main post was surrounded by high wooden walls. When it
was being built, the trees sacrificed had been honored as if they were fellow warriors. Haldrissa now prayed that the trees had retained their great prowess even in death. She suspected that the Sentinels would need it. Guards on the wall crouched low as they surveyed the forest beyond. Thus far, they had given no sign of sighting the enemy, although a few moved about as if momentarily believing that they had. The deadly whistle of another rain of arrows filled Haldrissa's ears. Denea shouted a warning to the gathering huntresses to quickly raise their shields. Arrows clattered against the shields. Unfortunately, some of the huntresses did not move fast enough. Screams rose as at least three of them fell with shafts sticking in them and others struggled with wounds. Haldrissa looked for her own archers and was grateful to see them ready to return fire. Arrows nocked, the archers awaited the word. The commander gave it to them without hesitation. Now the whistling became a sign of hope as night elven arrows soared out over the wall. Haldrissa raced toward it, aware that she would not be there in time to see the bolts descend, but hopeful that there would be evidence of their success. She heard cries from without as she climbed. More than a few. The orcs might have good archers among them, but they were not Sentinels. Haldrissa was certain that her people would inflict far more damage. She only hoped that it would be enough. As if in answer to her question, another stream of arrows returned just as the commander reached the top. Although she managed to duck, the Sentinel nearest to her was too slow with the shield she carried. The thick arrow completely piercing her throat, the dead night elf toppled back off the wall. Haldrissa peered into the forest. For the first time, the Horde began stepping from the protection of the trees. They were spread throughout the edge of the forest in various positions, and while a few had bows, others seemed intent on merely watching. No . . . not watching. Counting. Counting the return fire and the number of Sentinels on the walls. Squatting down again, Haldrissa turned back to those farther inside. "Cease fire! Cease fire!" Below, Denea looked as if her superior had gone mad. She hesitated long
enough for another rush of arrows to answer those from the Horde. Haldrissa silently cursed as the bolts flew over her. The orcs were expert warriors; by now they could make a good estimate on the Sentinels' strength in terms of the archers. Sure enough, as she looked outside again, she saw the orcs at the edge begin to creep back. Simultaneously, the forest quieted. No new flight assailed the night elves. "They have retreated," one younger Sentinel naïvely murmured to a comrade. "They are gone." "No," the commander replied, startling the pair and others nearby who, in the excitement, had forgotten that she was there. "No, they have only moved back a little for a short time. We remain under attack. The first person to forget that will likely not have to worry about punishment from me. The Horde will have already killed her." The warriors grew solemn, and several tightened their grips on their weapons. That was how Haldrissa wanted it. If they remained ready for the worst, they had a far better chance of survival. She quickly descended to Denea. "How are the archers?" "A few wounded, three dead. Say the word and we will send another greeting to those vermin!" "Never mind that. The hippogryphs! Were they able to get most of them to cover?" "Four are uninjured. Two more are wounded but able to fly. Two others have injured wings and cannot be counted. Another is sorely wounded, and I fear he will die." Six viable hippogryphs. It was better than Haldrissa had hoped, although fewer than she would have liked. "We do not have much time. See if Kara'din can do anything for the lessinjured ones first," Haldrissa ordered. She paused as a dark look passed over Denea's face. "What is it?" "I meant to tell you next. The druid is dead. In the last flight of arrows, a good number fell his direction. He was focused on our wounded and failed to protect himself sufficiently. I believe he died quickly, pierced so many times." Haldrissa cursed. "They saw a chance to take out the druid. Where is Parsis?" "No sign. He may be dead already."
The commander could not waste more time on the subject. The Sentinels had survived without druidic assistance for millennia and would do so now. "We move on, then. Get every archer ready quickly. The Horde will not wait long before beginning their attack in earnest. We do not know how many of the outposts have been hit and how many of those have been overrun already. We need to get word to Darnassus, but this time I want sufficient cover for the hippogryphs and their riders." "Do they each carry a copy of the message?" "Damn the message! At this point all they have to tell General Shandris is that Ashenvale is under full assault. Now, go get them ready!" Denea rushed off with a swiftness that the veteran warrior suddenly envied. Haldrissa already felt as if she had fought an entire battle, not merely the opening skirmish. The archers reassembled, though initially they kept in a loose enough arrangement that if the orcs fired at where they had initially stood, there would be few casualties. It bothered Haldrissa to even think of success being measured by trying to have losses kept to a minimum, but that was war. The more of her fighters she saved, the better, even if it meant some others might have to sacrifice themselves . . . including her. The hippogryphs were ready just a few minutes later. In all that time, the orcs had not fired one shot nor even sounded one horn. Haldrissa worried about that. Whoever was in charge of the attack had something insidious in mind, she was certain. Denea signaled her. Haldrissa silently motioned for the archers to ready themselves. When they had their bows nocked and aimed, she nodded to the brave scouts and hippogryphs, then to her second. Denea waved off the party. The great winged creatures flew into the air, their riders bent low. Each animal took a slightly different direction, but all headed toward the west. "Fire!" Haldrissa commanded. The front ranks of the archers let loose. The second held back, though, just as she had ordered. The stream of arrows soared out toward the forest. As that happened, the hippogryphs beat their wings harder. They rose higher and higher. Again, Haldrissa gave the order to fire. The latter ranks shot. All the while,
those who had first fired readied their bows once more. There was no return fire yet. Haldrissa almost held her breath, waiting for the Horde to try to shoot down the hippogryphs. Yet, they did nothing. At last, the winged creatures and their riders were out of bow range. The commander finally breathed a sigh of relief. "Look there!" someone cried. Haldrissa looked for the long-awaited flight of Horde arrows, but instead a more stunning view awaited her. High above and closing fast from the east were nearly a dozen blurry specks that coalesced just enough to reveal reptilian forms with batlike wings. Red reptilian forms. "Red dragons . . . " Haldrissa at first gasped before recognizing that these were more bestial in appearance, and more primitive of form. "No . . . red proto-dragons . . ." She had only heard of them in Northrend, but there had been rumors that the Horde had attempted to bring them to other regions. Savage creatures with stouter, toothy muzzles, they raced along the sky with clear intent. Their wings had sharp points to them, and the proto-dragons roared with monstrous eagerness as they closed. Too late, Haldrissa realized that she had played exactly into the Horde's hands. With an attack already under way, they had expected her to try to send another warning to Darnassus. Haldrissa had just sent the riders and their mounts to their doom. The Horde could not have many proto-dragons. These were likely most if not all. However, these were all they needed. Almost double the number of hippogryphs, the proto-dragons broke off in pairs to pursue the as-yetunsuspecting riders. A horn blared, Denea seeking to warn the scouts. Yet, even though some clearly reacted, it was too late. The proto-dragons-and their orc riders-had been waiting in hiding so near that it did not take them much time to overtake their quarry. Hippogryphs were hardly defenseless, and those working with the Sentinels were especially adept at battle. Unable to gain enough distance on their pursuers, most of the hippogryphs turned to face the proto-dragons. The scouts readied their bows. One fortunate scout got off a shot that swiftly dealt with the orc astride one
proto-dragon. The dead warrior tumbled off the side of his mount and dropped like a rock toward Ashenvale. Two proto-dragons caught a hippogryph between them. The hippogryph slashed with his talons, raking the snout of the nearest proto-dragon. The orc rider tried to aim his own bow, but the wound made his shot go wide. The hippogryph's rider fired back with success equal to the previous scout, sending another Horde corpse falling to the ground. Unfortunately, in focusing on the one proto-dragon, the hippogryph by necessity had to pay little attention to the other. The scout tried to nock another arrow in order to deal with the second, but in the process left herself open to the axe of that proto-dragon's rider. The orc struck hard, the axe blade crushing through armor, flesh, and bone. With a cry, the scout clutched the bleeding stump of an arm. The night elf was put out of her misery by a second swing of the blade, leaving the hippogryph to fend for himself while still bearing the dead rider. The brave creature managed another good swipe, this time at the underbelly of the second proto-dragon. The beast let out a pained roar and tilted to the side. The orc tried to cling on, but with one hand still gripping the axe, he could not. What saved him was the first proto-dragon, which appeared as if by silent command under the dropping orc. Grabbing hold, the orc repositioned himself on his new mount. Both the badly injured proto-dragon and its comrade closed on the hippogryph. Fangs tore into a wing. Claws ripped at a neck. The hippogryph made one last lunge at the most wounded of his adversaries. He tore into the throat of the proto-dragon. The proto-dragon planted its nails on one of the hippogryph's wings. So entangled, both plummeted to their doom. In an attempt to see their mission to fruition, two of the hippogryphs attempted to flee west. One did not make it far, and although the scout tried to aid by firing at their pursuers, a proto-dragon managed to cut the creature off. Unlike in the previous struggle, the hippogryph and night elf were unable to put up much of a defense before both were ripped to shreds by the combination of teeth, nails, and axes. The full aerial combat quickly began to shrink as the trapped defenders fell
one after another. Two more proto-dragons perished-as did their orcs-but soon there were only the one scout and hippogryph still seeking to outrace the two mounted proto-dragons slowly but surely closing. The trap had been set well, and Haldrissa felt personally responsible for each death she witnessed. Worse, there was nothing she could do but watch as the last was trapped. The scout and his hippogryph fought as valiantly as their comrades, even bringing down one of the other proto-dragons and its rider, but in the end, they, too, fell. The entire struggle had taken place over perhaps four minutes, though to Haldrissa it had seemed a horrific eternity. The Sentinels had not simply stood by as this all happened. Lancers astride nightsabers readied to lead the charge out the gates. Sentinels on foot held their glaives steady. Archers held off their fire, now awaiting the word that the Horde was finally attacking in earnest. The guards on the walls cautiously peered through carved gaps, waiting for the first rush of orcs. But nothing happened.
13
JAROD'S HUNT
Although Velen's arrival had not been expected, there was no question as to his staying as an honored guest, just like the rest of those representing the Alliance. However, the Prophet was not one who desired much in the way of accommodations, and insisted on a simple chamber. Tyrande saw that he received one that still faced him toward the temple proper. The tranquility of the Temple Gardens appealed to Velen, and so the present moment found him meditating there. The draenei sat with legs crossed, facing the center of the gardens, his concentration on the Light. The two honor guards the high priestess had assigned to him he had requested to stay behind at his quarters, their presence surely not needed in this of all places. He suddenly sensed the presence of someone else approaching him- someone who also had a tremendous affinity for the Light. It could be only one person. Without looking, Velen quietly said, "Welcome, Anduin Wrynn." The human did not seem at all surprised that Velen sensed him, a further sign that the Light was very strong with King Varian's son. "Hello, Prophet. I-I'm sorry if I disturb you." "Please, the title is one given to me by others. I prefer simply Velen." The draenei smoothly rose. "Your father does not know you are here." "No . . . he thinks I'm asleep. . . . " Anduin could not hide his guilt. "It is not for me to judge whether you should have stayed in your quarters or not. That is for you to decide." This statement seemed to put Anduin at ease a bit. "I'm old enough to make my own choices, despite what my father thinks. I love him, but he fears so much to lose me again-or to lose me forever, as he did Mother-that he nearly
smothers me. I can never be out of his sight for more than a few minutes." "One can understand his concern . . . and your difficulty with it, as well." "Proph-Velen, you know why I've come here." "You wish to speak more of the Light. I am happy to tell you what I know, if you respect that I will not seek to guide you from your father." Anduin nodded, at that moment looking to Velen much like the king. "I wouldn't ask it. I only want to learn more." He put a hand to his heart. "I feel the Light here. I feel it more every day. It's as much a part of me as anything else is." "Yes. It is extremely strong where you are concerned." Velen glanced around the gardens, but there was no one else about. "We can talk for a time, if you like, so long as you promise me you will return to your quarters afterward." The gratitude with which the youth radiated was almost as strong as the Light within. "I promise." As they walked, Velen studied the boy closely. Yes, I must teach him all I know, if that is possible. This one has a destiny with the Light. . . . Velen ever remained aware of just who walked with him. Anduin was heir to Stormwind, and the draenei knew how important Stormwind was to this troubled world just now. The Alliance needed Stormwind, perhaps more than even its king realized. Anything that threatened the stability of Stormwind threatened the long-term stability of the Alliance, especially in the face of a resurgent Horde. Yet, if the Light had other plans for Anduin Wrynn . . .
You must move on, Jarod heard his wife's voice murmur to him. It was not the first time since coming here that he had heard it, and while some might have thought that they were going mad, Jarod accepted it as her simply still watching out for him as she always had in life.
He had already departed his quarters some time ago in the hopes of trying to regain some focus. Even though he would continue to mourn Shalasyr- perhaps for the rest of his life-he knew that she would have expected him to do more than that. As much as Jarod hated the thought, Shalasyr would have wanted him to fit himself back into night elf society, find some other purpose. Yet, what that purpose might be, he did not know and, in truth, did not completely care. Still, Jarod knew that he had to try.
There was no question about returning to the military. In part, that had to do with dealing with Shandris, something he was not prepared to do for the time being . . . if ever. However, it also had to do with Jarod's lingering feelings concerning how he saw night elf society. There were hints that things had changed, that Malfurion and Tyrande had begun bringing the various segments of their people closer again . . . but he needed to see more. The war had left too much of a mark on him. I apparently am beginning to grow old. Jarod hoped that he would not become as he had seen some of the elder night elves he had witnessed just after the war's end. Their entire world turned upside down by the struggle against the Burning Legion and the destruction of Zin-Azshari, they had been unable to cope with their new, unpredictable future. Several had slipped into fantasy worlds of their own that consisted of safe memories of the past. Many of those had never found their way back to reality. But for Shalasyr's sake alone, Jarod was determined to live. Forcing himself to leave his quarters and start walking among his own kind were the first steps. He had even made it a point to keep an eye out for anyone he remembered and be sure to greet them. That had caused a few startled expressions, but Jarod had felt that his wife would have been proud of his initial effort. Still, he was more than happy to finally head back. In fact, the closer he got, the more he picked up his pace, eager to return to what had become his sanctuary. And thus it was that Jarod nearly fell atop the body in his path. He saved himself from doing so at the last minute by grabbing hold of one of the last trees within reach. Even still, the former guard captain dropped down on one knee upon the arm of the corpse. The years since the war melted away as Jarod reacted like a soldier once again. Pressing against the tree, he peered around for the assassin. Seeing no one, Jarod cautiously bent low to investigate the grisly find. At first, he wondered if perhaps he was losing himself in old memories. He had not seen such a figure since the war. That Jarod had not even noticed the brightly colored garment bespoke just how deep he had been in his reverie. "A Highborne . . . " Belatedly, it returned to him that they had come seeking readmittance to night elf society. With the exception of his accidental leaning on the arm, Jarod was careful
not to touch the body. It was already evident what had likely proven the spellcaster's end-the two jagged slits in his throat indicated a large dagger wielded by an enthusiastic hand. There was also something pinned by a rock to the dead mage's chest. Questions filled Jarod's head, some of them very disturbing. One that particularly vexed him from the start was why the Highborne should be here in the first place. What business had the spellcaster had so near where Jarod lived? The answer came to him as he studied the ground nearby. Someone had been careful to remove any footsteps, and he knew why: the Highborne had been slain elsewhere and then dragged to this spot. Despite the efforts to cover that fact up, there were still some tiny, telltale spots of what could only be blood. They led toward the east for a few paces before ceasing. From all this, Jarod decided that the reason that the Highborne had been found by him was simply that the assassins had not wanted the victim to be discovered near the place of his demise. Something there would have possibly given searchers a clue to the truth. It occurred to him suddenly that this was not his task. By rights, he had to report this to the Sentinels or, more to his preference, the archdruid or high priestess. Jarod looked around again, saw no one, and decided to risk leaving the body alone while he searched for someone with authority. Being a druid, Malfurion was likely somewhere beyond Darnassus, so Jarod headed toward the temple. At the very least, he believed Tyrande would be there, and if it turned out the archdruid also was, so much the better. "Jarod?" He stopped at the sound of Shandris's voice. Flanked by four Sentinels, she, too, headed toward the temple. "Shan-General," he responded, trying to regain his composure. After her initial outburst of his name, she, too, sought to bring things to a more detached level. "Jarod. You have business with the high priestess?" It took but a moment's debate before he admitted the truth. "Yes . . . someone has been murdered." Her guards immediately tensed. Shandris signaled them to calm down, though her eyes burned at the revelation. "Where? Who?" "I found the body near my quarters." He gave her a more precise location. "It was one of the Highborne. I do not know him. There was some note under
him, but I did not touch it." "A Highborne . . . " Shandris looked at the guard nearest her left. "Send word to Maiev Shadowsong"-she hesitated a moment as she noted Jarod's reaction to his sister's name-"with the details you just heard." To the guard next to that one, she continued, "Take Ildyri and hurry to where he said the body was located. Keep guard over it until Maiev or her people arrive." The other Sentinels rushed to obey, leaving Shandris with just the one guard. The general bade Jarod join her, the other Sentinel following them. The guards did not hesitate to let Shandris pass. She strode unerringly through the temple to where they found Tyrande. The high priestess greeted them with a knowing expression. "There has been a death." Shandris went down on one knee, the other Sentinel and Jarod doing the same. "Another Highborne." Tyrande bade them to rise. "You found the body, Jarod?" He realized that she had read the fact in his urgent manner. "Yes. Not far from my quarters. I judged that the body had been moved from elsewhere after the murder. I assume to hide facts about the true location. . . ." "That seems logical to me," Shandris added. "I have sent someone to inform Maiev and others to guard the body until she or the Highborne do something with it." "And we shall do something . . . not only now with Ha'srim's body, but also with these curs who think the Highborne will stand by and be slain without repercussion!" Malfurion and a Highborne had entered the chamber from another direction. Jarod understood that this was someone high among the magi, though he doubted it was the leader. That was verified by Tyrande's reply. "Do you speak in the name of Archmage Mordent now, Var'dyn?" "I presage his words, High Priestess! Patient though he is, the Archmage will not let this stand! This lack of progress has been discussed among the Highborne. We would hate to have to make these crimes more public, especially with the emissaries now present for your summit, but we will do so if necessary. Perhaps, then, something will be done about the murders." He glared at all in the room, finally fixing his blazing eyes upon Jarod. "You! You
are the one who claims to have found the body, are you not? I am curious how you happened to be near-" "I do not 'claim' to have found it. I did." A rare fury stirred in the former guard captain. "And if you are considering me as the possible assassin, you will find yourself sorely mistaken." Malfurion raised his staff between the pair. "I am certain that Var'dyn is not making any unwarranted accusations, Jarod. We are all struggling to come to grips with this foul matter. I am sure Var'dyn joins me in commending you for immediately alerting us to this second murder." The mage hesitated, then replied, "Yes. Of course. Thank you, Jarod Shadowsong." It surprised Jarod that Var'dyn knew who he was, especially considering his threatening posture a moment before. He nodded to the mage but said nothing. "All is being done to find the perpetrators, Var'dyn," the high priestess assured. "Maiev is dedicated to the truth, and nothing will stand in her way." "She has a coarse way about her, but I have spoken with this one's sister and find her as you say," the Highborne admitted. "However, she is one, where these assassins could be many. . . . Darnassus is surely riddled with those plotting against the return of the Highborne, and we will not stand idly by any longer!" At that point, Var'dyn gave Tyrande and Malfurion a fleeting bow, then turned on his heel and marched off. Jarod could not tell whether he had been satisfied by the high priestess's promises or he merely knew that he could do nothing without this Archmage Mordent's permission. "Amazing that anyone should dislike the Highborne," Shandris remarked under her breath. "They are the epitome of respect and congeniality." Jarod made no response, although he was aware that she had spoken so that he was the only other one who would hear. Both Malfurion and Tyrande turned their attention to him. Jarod suddenly felt uneasy. He was certain that the pair desired something of him. "Jarod, I want to again express our appreciation of your handling of the vile discovery," Tyrande said. "I did as should be done." "Not everyone would have behaved the same way. Your training and common sense shone through." She glanced at her husband, who nodded back.
"Var'dyn is correct in one thing. Maiev will need some assistance. We cannot afford for this to continue, not only for the Highborne's sake, but also for everything we are trying to accomplish with this summit." "My sister is very competent and very determined. I cannot think of anyone more suited for the task." Tyrande smiled. "Perhaps, but her brother would certainly be an asset to the search." Even though he had seen the suggestion coming, Jarod did not know how to answer. "If the high priestess-if you think this a necessary duty-" "It is a request, Jarod. No command. You can refuse and we will understand perfectly." He knew that she truly meant that, but hearing her say so proved the impetus to his decision. "I will do my part, though I will bow to Maiev's authority on this." "Of course." Tyrande looked grateful. The archdruid also showed his pleasure. "Your support will be invaluable, Jarod. We need everyone right now." "I will do all I can . . . and the first thing I need to do is find my sister and explain this." The high priestess shook her head. "I will inform her." "With all due respect, I would like to tell her myself. It would be . . . more appropriate in this case." "As you wish, then." Jarod bowed to both. Shandris did the same and joined him as he departed. The general sent the Sentinel accompanying them on to other duties. "I am very glad to have you a part of this," she said quietly once the pair was alone. "Your sister is very dedicated, but often her focus is a bit too . . . narrow." "I know Maiev has faults, but I have as many if not more. We will do all we can to stop these assassinations." "Let us hope so. I am no admirer of the Highborne, but I can see how they might grow restive as their members are cut down. Darnassus-the night elf race in general-can ill afford a conflict between them and everyone else." He stopped. "You have dealt with my sister. Where would I most likely find her at this point? Where I left the body?" Shandris took the unspoken farewell without a beat. She pointed. "No. By
this point, she and her Watchers are probably moving it for better study. I would say your best bet is to meet her there instead." "And where is that?" "The place where she and her Watchers train. I know that she organized and conducted her investigation of the first murder from there." "Thank you." He dared not say anything more, though her eyes showed that she waited for him to do so. Steeling himself, Jarod bowed to her and headed in the direction she had indicated. As he journeyed, Jarod drew the dagger sheathed at his side. He probably did not need it . . . but then, two people had been slain. That they had been Highborne did not rule out that the perpetrators might not kill someone interfering with their plans. The sounds of Darnassus muted abruptly as he neared the location Shandris had suggested. The dark mood of his surroundings fit well with how he saw his sister. She had always been the driven one, while he had simply stumbled through life, rising-in his estimation-more by chance than by ability. Still, Jarod hoped that Maiev would see his value in this mission. The practice area used by his sister and her followers appeared empty. The crudely drawn expressions on the row of wooden practice dummies seemed to mock his failure to find Maiev. False swords raised high and chipped shields ever at the ready, even as savagely hacked as they were, they looked at the moment far more capable than Jarod felt. The male night elf looked around, pondering where to go next if Maiev did not show up soon. He considered the fact that she might have gone to the Highborne encampment, but ruled that out as reckless, even by his sister's standards. Frustrated at not finding Maiev here, Jarod turned- And stared directly into the eyes of what could only be one of his sister's Watchers. She wore armor akin to Maiev's, but of a slightly duller shade. Her helmet hung from a branch just to her left, as if the Watcher had just taken it off. Propped against the trunk of the same tree was her umbra crescent. "You are he," the younger night elf stated without preamble. "You are her brother." She eyed him critically. "I expected you to be taller and more scarred from all those battles." Her comment made him wonder just what Maiev had said about him over the millennia. Had he so disappointed her that she had been forced to make him more in the image of what he should have been?
When Jarod did not respond, the Watcher added, "I am Neva." She started walking, her movements as smooth as those of a nightsaber. Jarod felt as if she were sizing up prey. Neva circled him, taking in every aspect of Maiev's brother. "No . . . you are as you should be. Like her." Not certain how to take that, he asked, "Where is Maiev? I need to speak with her." "She was here not long ago, but no sooner did they bring the body of that spellcaster than some of his kind showed up to take it away. Maiev was not too pleased. She was not done with it." Neva might as well have been talking about a chair or some other insignificant object. Jarod sighed. "So she is at their encampment?" "Very possibly." Neva sauntered to his side, then leaned uncomfortably close. "You can wait here with me. She will be back very soon; I am certain-" Jarod suddenly pushed past Neva, but not because of her. Rather, something watched both from beyond the area-something that did not remind him of a night elf. He heard Neva speak, but her words were lost as he threw himself after the spying figure. Whoever it was moved swiftly and surely between the trees. He remembered what had been mentioned about the worgen, whom he had yet to meet. This would not be the first time they had lurked around the area during troubling times. Jarod tore through the forest, moving automatically. He was certain that he was on the path the figure had gone. All he had to do was keep to the right behind the next tree- His body was wracked by agonizing pain, and he felt as if a hundred bolts of lightning had struck him simultaneously. Jarod shrieked and felt no disgrace in doing so. No one could suffer such torture and not react as he did. He tumbled forward-or tried. Falling to the ground in some ways would have seemed at least a little relief. Jarod had the great desire to curl up in a ball and pray that the continuous shock would cease, but some force prevented him. It was as if a web held him in place to ensure that his suffering continued unabated. Jarod tried to tear his arms free. If it had allowed him to escape, he would have at that moment gladly given up those arms. Anything to escape. The hope for death began to stir within him, but then Shalasyr's face
appeared in his thoughts. She had always enjoyed life, even under the most primitive of circumstances. Jarod, who had never been able to forget the horrors of the War of the Ancients, had learned from her. She had drawn him back to the world in a way nothing else could. And he knew that she wanted him to live, wanted him to go on, not follow her unless there was no other alternative. Feeling her love again gave Jarod new strength. The torture continued, but now he had something upon which to cling. With Shalasyr, there had always been hope. . . . The unremitting shock ceased. Jarod crumpled to the grassy earth at last. He welcomed the collision with the soft soil, the rattling of his bones far less painful than what he had been through. The cool surface felt good against his skin. A hand gripped his left arm. The touch was initially enough to resurrect some traces of the monstrous pain. Jarod cringed, fearing the full force of it would return; but although the fingers held tight, the pain receded again, becoming nothing but memory. "Can you understand me?" asked an unfamiliar male voice. "Can you?" The former guard captain managed a croaking sound that the other apparently took as an affirmative. The figure moved Jarod to the side, finally resting him against a tree. "I'm sorry," his rescuer whispered. "I didn't know that would happen. I didn't realize that it was there." Jarod managed another croak. His vision was still clouded by tears. His companion could have been invisible for all he was able to make out of him. He felt the hands stiffen as an unidentifiable sound in the distance reached them. Jarod's rescuer suddenly released him. The night elf did not hear the other depart, but felt certain somehow that such was the case. Jarod's breathing returned to near normal. His vision remained teary, but shapes began to coalesce. Vaguely, Jarod finally registered that he had been caught in some insidious trap. So close to where Maiev and her Watchers met, he thought it was possible that it had been set by the assassins to catch one of them. After all, his sister was in charge of the investigation. Barely a minute had passed when light footsteps alerted him to someone's approach. Jarod did not think it his rescuer, and when he heard the intake of breath-a sign of the newcomer's apparent astonishment at discovering him-
he knew it to be female. The former captain could only assume it was Neva, who had finally managed to follow his trail. "You live . . . ," he heard the Watcher say. "Of course he does," responded another, stronger female voice that made Jarod look up. He saw a vague shape standing over him. "He is my brother, after all."
14
THE WORGEN
More resembling a ghostly fleet worthy of the undead Forsaken, the eight remaining Horde ships at last reached Bilgewater Harbor, located off of Azshara, which lay east of greater Ashenvale. Captain Briln wasted no time disembarking once the goblins who ran the port had set everything in place. He had delivered what he could of his cargo and now was happy to be rid of it . . . even if that also meant that he would have to face the warchief over his failure. Since his last visit here, the port had been built up considerably, and now covered the entire small island. The main keep rose high above the other structures and a thriving population-mostly goblins-scurried about as they dealt with not only the docking ships but also countless other Horde-related activities. At one of the other docks, a crane ending in a large hook lowered supplies into a warship. A goblin operating a foul-smelling mechanism used for unloading cargo trundled by in the distance. As deadly as the shredders could be when turned on a foe, they paled in comparison to the natural fury of Briln's cargo. The first of the huge hold doors opened, and the crews began unloading the covered cages. None of those who had been part of the journey looked like the orcs that they had once been. Everyone was drawn, anxious. From the docks there came some sniggering from a pair of goblins watching the activities. Growling, Briln turned on the short, wiry figures, towering over them. "The warchief's pets're hungry after this journey! They could use a snack- or two. . . . " As the goblins fell silent, he added, "Now, you can either help your lot take over control of the cages, or you can be part o' what I feed them. . . ."
With great swallows and suddenly polite demeanors, the two goblins saluted the captain and hurried to obey. Briln allowed himself a short chuckle before the seriousness of his own situation again arose to the forefront. He was more likely than the goblins to become food for the cargo. He suddenly noticed a flurry of movement from the mainland. A fair-size party was approaching by boat, one that included at least half a dozen capable guards who could only be part of the warchief's famed Kor'kron. "Garrosh," he whispered. Not for a moment did Briln think of seeking to avoid the encounter. His honor meant more than his life, and he would not be branded a coward in the last moments of it. The crews and the dockworkers already had all but two of the cages settled in an open area reserved just for their arrival. Briln was proud of those who had served under him during the epic journey. He would commend them all before his execution. Dust and bits of leaves decorated Garrosh and his retinue, a sign that they themselves had also but recently arrived in Azshara. The warchief had an expectant look on his face, but whether that boded good or ill for the captain, Briln could not say, and thus he did not raise his hopes. Orcs and goblins slapped their right fists to the left sides of their chests as the Horde leader passed. Garrosh did not demand such signs of fealty, but was the type of commander who simply received them due to the immense respect and fear his followers had in him. Briln did as the others and in addition kept his head low. Garrosh, should he desire it, could have that head immediately. "Briln," rumbled the warchief. "A long journey you've had." "A short one, when in service to the Horde and you," the captain returned, daring to peer up under his thick brow. "And surely less dangerous than the trek from which my warchief's obviously just come!" "We do what we do for the greater cause." Garrosh stared past him at the cages. "Eight. There were supposed to be more." "There were . . . troubles." "Storms?" "Yes, and the unrest of the cargo. Much of the concoction meant to keep the beasts docile was lost, and so we could do only what we could do." Even as he
spoke, Briln felt his shame growing. His replies sounded so weak, he thought it a wonder Garrosh did not cut out his tongue to make him stop. "Eight," the warchief repeated. "Show them to me." Briln was now certain of his fate. Garrosh would not take his head; he would let one of the beasts rip the captain to shreds. Briln could not blame the warchief. It was a reasonable punishment for one who had so badly failed. He led Garrosh and the others to the first of the cages. Inside, the beast, smelling the nearness of so many orcs, stirred. The sides of the cage shook. "Pull back the tarp!" the captain ordered. Four of the crew used the attached ropes to pull back the tarp over the cage door. As they did, the shaking increased and a growl rose. From the other cages there came answering sounds. Briln felt a moment of déjà vu and half expected one or more of the creatures to break free. Guards with spears quickly moved in just in case they had to defend the warchief. The captain took no comfort in the awed expressions of several of those with Garrosh. They had every reason to be amazed and not a little wary of the prizes that their leader had ordered shipped from Northrend. However, none of them had been assigned the task. They were safe. Briln was not. Garrosh stepped closer . . . too close for the captain's taste. The beast, apparently of the same opinion, leapt forward and tried to fit an arm through the bars. Unlike the one monster, this creature failed. He sought then to bend the bars in order to make a better attempt, but although they creaked ominously, they did not give . . . for now. The warchief appeared unimpressed by the ferocity of the caged horror. Looking to the Kor'kron, he said, "They'll have to be reminded of their purpose . . . and what will happen if they don't follow through." It was the first time in ages that Briln was reminded that, despite everything, the beasts were nearly as intelligent as their captors. Much more primitive, certainly, but nearly as intelligent. One of Garrosh's guards gestured to another Kor'kron standing by the entrance to a metal longhouse just north of the area. Something had been planned for just this occasion, and the captain had an idea what it was. The grim guard disappeared into the longhouse. All the while, the beast before Garrosh raged, now joined with savage gusto by the other seven. Everywhere, orcs and goblins tensed, awaiting disaster. Only the warchief and
the Kor'kron remained absolutely calm, even expectant. Several startled grunts suddenly arose from the longhouse. They were like nothing Briln had ever heard. No . . . they did resemble something. Although higher in pitch and sounding more curious than frightened, they were very much akin to the deeper voices of the cargo. And the creatures in the cargo knew it also. Almost as one, the eight cages grew silent. Garrosh nodded to the one before him. The warchief did not look happy with what had just taken place, but seemed resigned to it. "You understand. They are well, as I have promised. You will all thus keep your promise." There was a grunt from the cage. Garrosh signaled for the tarp to be let down again. Only when it had completely covered up the cargo did Briln breathe easier. The guard who had entered the longhouse exited again, this time to report to the warchief. He looked a bit anxious as he neared. Garrosh indicated that the party-including the captain-should step farther away from the cages. "I did as you commanded," the Kor'kron muttered, speaking so that only those with Garrosh could hear. "I gave some of the younglings a share of that sweetened meat their kind likes so much. They raised a real ruckus. Was it enough?" Garrosh nodded approval. "The adult beasts heard them. They should stay docile now. They just had to be reminded about our deal." At that moment Briln found he did not envy Garrosh; the complexities of command in such times surely tore at Garrosh's sense of honor constantly as he sought to do what was best for his followers in the long run. He must have stared too long at the warchief, for Garrosh abruptly looked back at him. The legendary warrior's brow furrowed. "How many died to bring even these eight here?" Briln made an estimate that included not only those lost when their ships went down but also those lost in getting the beasts to the port in Northrend. Having tried continuously to avoid thinking of those who had given their lives while he had survived, the captain was dismayed by the number he told the warchief. Garrosh was equally dismayed and did not entirely hide that fact. "As many
as that? A great price . . . but it'll be worth their sacrifices and more when Ashenvale falls to us!" The Horde leader straightened, now looking every bit the dedicated, confident commander. "They who've died to bring these beasts here will stand beside us in spirit as we crush our foes! When the last outpost falls, this victory will belong as much to them as to those of us who are there to see it happen!" His vow brought cheers from those surrounding him, even Briln. If he was to be executed, he hoped that at least he would be remembered along with all the other dead involved in this mission. It was more than he could ask. "Captain Briln." The mariner swallowed. He immediately slapped his fist against his chest again, then bent his head so as to offer his neck. "My warchief, I can't give any excuse for my failure! You command that we bring you ten, and I deliver only eight! Many of those who perished did so as part of the fleet that I oversaw!" Briln waited for Gorehowl to fall, but when the fabled axe did not cut off his head, he went on. "My warchief, I confess all these failures, all these stains to my honor, and await my fate!" There was silence, then he heard Garrosh say, "Your honor is your life." "Yes, my warchief." "And your life you offer to me." Again Briln agreed. At the same time he thought to himself, My disgrace is great! Garrosh rightly makes me suffer for my failures before granting me a proper death to atone for them! "So, if your life is mine, then your honor is mine . . . and as it is my honor at stake, I would have it redeemed in battle!" The captain could not help gaping as he looked up. "I don't understand, Warchief. . . ." "You will join us as we march through Ashenvale and see your work crush the Alliance! You will stand at the forefront, and if you die, your name will be spoken with pride by our people for generations!" Garrosh himself offered Briln a hand up. The captain stared wide-eyed. "Your first mate will now be captain. You'll now command soldiers in combat, and you will serve directly under me." Briln's chest swelled with pride. "I will slay a hundred night elves before they bring me down! I will destroy Silverwing Outpost myself!"
The warchief chuckled. "Fight well. That's what I ask." "I will!" There was a rumble from the closest cage, but a tentative one that did not threaten. The creatures were subdued. "We leave at sunrise tomorrow," Garrosh announced with confidence, ignoring the fact that he had clearly just arrived himself after what must have been a strenuous ride. "The first stage of my plan's at work on the night elves in Ashenvale already! Their communications with Darnassus are cut off and they will be making many assumptions as to what comes next based on past wars!" He gestured at the cages. "They'll die discovering just what great fools they've been made. . . ." The nearest beast rumbled again, this time seeming to echo the warchief's triumphant tone. Briln's grin widened. He would live to see his work unleashed upon the night elves. He would live to know that he had served the Horde well. And he would live to see the beginning of a new world-one forged by the hand of the Horde, not the Alliance. . . .
Tyrande and Malfurion had chosen to have the summit outside, in an area often used for grand events. They could have used the temple, where they had held their wedding, but part of the choice had to do with the Gilneans. It had been agreed by both that the introduction of Genn's people to the Alliance would be better served outside, where some of those who might be discomforted by their presence would be able to avoid feeling trapped.
Now, with seating arranged in more circular fashion save for an entrance to the east, the highest-ranking night elves seated themselves and then awaited the entrances of their guests. All had now arrived save the magi of Dalaran, whose ruling council, the Kirin Tor, had declined to send a representative due to Dalaran's desire to remain a bridge between the two warring sides. In Dalaran, magi of the Horde were as welcome as those serving the Alliance. Tyrande and Malfurion had the seats of honor at the opposing end from the entrance. Sentinels in their full uniforms stood as honor guard near not only the high priestess and archdruid but also the entrance, where they would flank each of the visiting contingents. But this was more than merely the official introduction of the summit. The entrances would be climaxed by the Ceremony of Induction, when new
members of the Alliance would be added by call of vote. If a new member was accepted, it made sense that its representatives would then seat themselves and become part of the discussion to follow. To wait until a gathering was nearly at the end was ludicrous. And if a supplicant was rejected . . . it also made sense for that party to depart as quickly as possible so as to keep its shame to a minimum. On the surface, there was no sign of the turmoil going on in Darnassus. News had reached the pair that something-exactly what it was had not been made clear-had happened to Maiev's brother in the course of the investigation. Malfurion and Tyrande only knew that Jarod was bedridden from injury. The high priestess had sent healers, and so there was apparently no fear of permanent injury, but both leaders desired to speak with Maiev's brother as soon as matters permitted. Archmage Mordent had also promised that the Highborne would remain quiet about the investigation during the events, though Var'dyn had voiced some opposition to that. The spellcasters had no active role in the summit, their situation strictly a night elf matter and of no business to the Alliance as a whole. When all were seated save for those making their entrance, Tyrande signaled the trumpeters. The horns blared, and the procession of Alliance members commenced. So that there would be no quarrels, the positions were chosen by lots. Thus it was that by sheer chance the first to enter were the gnomes, led by Gelbin Mekkatorque in his mechanostrider. The gnomes were followed by the representatives of Theramore, and so on. Each contingent sought to display to the best of their abilities their prowess. Wondrous and unnerving mechanisms traveled with the gnomes. The dwarves performed martial feats with their hammers as they marched, revealing the swiftness and dexterity their stout forms belied. Each time one faction stepped through the entrance, the anthem of its land played. At the sound of the first note, the night elves rose in respect to their guests and remained so as one group followed another. Around the place of gathering, the banners of each delegation fluttered proud and strong, even though those in attendance did not feel any breeze themselves. The well-focused wind was the archdruid's doing. Each procession halted before the high priestess and archdruid. There, the
ruler or lead representative was greeted by a nod from the two night elves. It was yet another manner by which the pair thanked all those who attended-and also hopefully helped put their guests in a good mood for the discussions to come. Stormwind was one of the last to enter but was among the most impressive. Varian led a crack contingent of his finest soldiers, and he himself was clad in armor that shone like the sun, so polished it was. Across his breastplate was emblazoned a regal lion's head. At his side was sheathed his legendary blade. Next to him strode Anduin, the prince dressed in a blue and gold suit designed for the royal court, as opposed to war. Upon reaching Tyrande and Malfurion, Varian gave a sweeping bow. The theatrical flourish was not in keeping with his stolid demeanor, but before Malfurion or the high priestess could decipher what it might mean, the king of Stormwind had moved on. The last of the members of the Alliance seated themselves. Tyrande looked about, saw that all awaited what was next to come. Sharing a hopeful look with the archdruid, she rose. "Sisters and brothers of the Alliance, comrades and friends, I call for a vote to open this gathering!" In the same order that they had entered, the representatives cast their vote as she requested. The motion was a formality and passed without any dissension. "My friends," Tyrande went on. "It is with gratitude that the archdruid and I greet all of you! That you have chosen to join together at this summit is a true sign of hope in a troubled time." There were murmurs of agreement from some of the members and their parties. "We have many grave matters to discuss," the high priestess continued. "Many of you have suffered dearly since the madness of Deathwing tore Azeroth asunder, and are rightfully concerned that the Alliance might demand more from your people before the lands can heal themselves. I cannot promise that this will not happen." Now there were wary glances. Yet, all respected Tyrande and her husband so much that no one saw fit to voice their concerns on that very subject . . . for the moment. Malfurion's hand touched hers. Tyrande looked at the entrance. She saw no
one, but the archdruid had clearly noted some signal. "But before we can begin those discussions in earnest, we must ensure that we do so with every possible valued member present! And today we have those who would seek to become one of us, who would seek to share in our efforts to strengthen the Alliance. . . ." A horn sounded . . . and immediately after, the anthem of Gilneas played. Heads turned with anticipation toward the entrance. Tyrande and Malfurion glanced at King Varian, but his expression still revealed nothing. A stillness fell over the audience as the first figure stepped into sight. Genn Greymane. He himself bore the banner of Gilneas-a red design consisting of a circle with three vertical lines akin to lances and another line bisecting the circle itself, all set in a field of gray-into the assembly, carrying it with a pride and strength worthy of a warrior much younger. In contrast to the splendor displayed by many in the audience, Genn wore the same simple, loose garments that he had during the banquet, and when the first of his people followed him into the assembly, they were seen to be dressed similarly. Where there had only been a small band at the banquet, with Genn now marched a number that not coincidently matched the strength of Stormwind's contingent. Genn obviously desired to show the others that he could offer the Alliance a powerful ally. Yet, although the men and women of Gilneas looked to be sturdy of build and clearly willing fighters, they were noticeably unarmed. Even the pole upon which their banner fluttered had no point at the top, meaning that it could not represent any sort of weapon. It was as if the Gilneans sought to prove to their counterparts that they had no use for such. Genn paused before the night elf leaders, acknowledging them as those before had. Then, in a change from the entrance of the other kingdoms, he took the pole and thrust the bottom hard into the ground. "Gilneas stands before you!" the king called to all around him and his followers. "Gilneas stands before you to atone for its sins by offering its might to any and all of the Alliance who need it! No truer brother will there be to any in their time of distress!" He stepped back to join Eadrik and the others. The Gilneans formed an arc facing every direction except the entrance, pointedly making certain that no matter where one sat in the assembly, he or she would be viewing some
member of Genn's band more or less in full. "And lest anyone think us of weak use in battle, of being unable to defend our brothers beside us, we now hope to dispel that misconception. . . ." With that, Genn and his people transformed. Their bodies swelled, growing a third again in girth and height. Although originally loose-fitting, the Gilneans' clothing still proved too tight for this shift, and shirts and jerkins ripped loudly. Hair sprouted over the Gilneans' arms, legs, chests, and faces, spreading so thick that it became fur. Beneath the fur came the sounds of cracking and popping, of bones shifting and tendons stretching into positions of which they should not have been accustomed. Their arms and legs twisted as their forms contorted, the legs turning sleeker, more akin to those of a swift predator. Each figure became hunched, but in that manner of a powerfully built beast. As the audience watched, rapt, the Gilneans' hands stretched and the nails grew into long, savage claws. Yet, that paled in comparison to the astounding metamorphosis of their faces. It was not just that the ears narrowed and stretched but that the mouth and nose pushed forward, melded together, and created a muzzle filled with sharp teeth capable of rending through flesh without trouble. The worgen stood before the Alliance. The lupine figures held their ground, although there was in them the evident urge to run, to hunt. They did not turn from the gazes of the crowd, instead staring confidently back. Genn Greymane, his chest heaving from adrenaline, eyed Malfurion and Tyrande. They nodded in turn. There was no greater way to emphasize the worth of the Gilneans to the Alliance than for the refugees to reveal their full strength. The Gilneans had not always been among the worgen, though, and not all of their people were affected. Many were, however . . . and it was, to Malfurion's shame, he himself who was in great part to blame. It had begun with other druids, those experimenting with the pack form. They had called upon the power to shift into large wolves, only to discover too late that in these forms they lost control of themselves. Blood had been shed. Malfurion was one of those nearly lost, the aid of the demigod Cenarius all that saved him. Finally aware of the threat, Malfurion had banned the form's
use. However, unbeknownst to him, a group of druids had gathered in secret to continue its efforts. Using the legendary artifact called the Scythe of Elune, they had sought to tame the wolf form . . . only to have the scythe transform them into the first of the worgen. Bringing the savage creatures under control, Malfurion dismissed the advice of others who demanded their destruction and cast the worgen into a pocket dimension within the Emerald Dream, where they lay in a taming sleep under the tree Daral'nir. That was supposed to have been the end of the tragic matter-and it would have been, if not for the human archmage Arugal. Under the orders of a desperate Genn seeking aid against the Scourge outside Gilneas's great wall, the mage had pulled the worgen to the kingdom . . . and once the curse of the worgen had entered, it spread through the populace swiftly. Yet, the Gilneans had discovered the means to control their feral nature and turn what had been evil into-at least to a point-a force to benefit themselves in regards to not only the Alliance but also the eventual liberation of their homeland. "We are Gilneas," Genn Greymane rumbled, his voice still distinctly his own, albeit now with a guttural addition to it. "We are the worgen. . . ." The king howled. The sound was not meant to disturb or frighten, only to again point out the power of him and his people. In that, it served well, for even the dour Dark Irons looked with great respect and interest at the might of the worgen. As Genn's howl reached its crescendo, the others with him added their voices. Yet, even that paled when from beyond the summit, from deep within the forest, other worgen voices answered the call. Their combined howl lasted but a scant few seconds, yet that was long enough for the moment to burn into the memories of most there. As Genn ceased-and his people near and far immediately did the same-the king of Gilneas concluded, "We humbly submit ourselves before our brethren for full membership in the Alliance. . . ." No one responded at first, so unsettling was the sight. Rising, Malfurion pointed at the worgen. "A few of you know the old tales of the worgen and their ferocity! You know the stories of their unthinking evil! To both you and those unfamiliar with the stories, what stands before you has little link to either
legends or the past! These fighters of Gilneas have tamed the curse! That which was once a deadly threat is now forevermore a force for good, a force for the Alliance!" The archdruid's words rang throughout the assembly. Genn and the worgen waited as the emissaries digested both what Malfurion had said and, more importantly, what they had just witnessed. Murmuring rose among the representatives, and they quickly became more animated. Kurdran suddenly rose. "Wildhammer welcomes the strength o' the worgen . . . and o' Gilneas!" Tervosh immediately followed. "Theramore seconds that welcome!" At these pronouncements, applause burst from many sections of the gathering, applause for Gilneas. Several of the emissaries and members of their parties saluted Genn's people in one manner or another. Tyrande, touching her husband's hand, took command of events again. "You have witnessed the might of Gilneas and heard its request to enter back into the Alliance!" the high priestess called, echoing Malfurion's sentiments. "I say that, after seeing this display and if there are no objections, we shall begin a vote for approval immediately!" The high priestess let her gaze sweep over the assembly, focusing no longer on Stormwind than she did any other faction. There was no objection, and even Varian seemed in a reasonable mood. "I call for a vote by acclamation!" the archdruid next proclaimed, following the course of action that they had discussed previous to the gathering. "A single voice to acknowledge the welcome of the worgen into the Alliance! All those in favor-" The chorus of ayes began to resound, their enthusiasm matching that of the worgen's earlier howl. Malfurion and Tyrande glanced down at Genn, who gave them a grateful look in turn. And then, from where the contingent of Stormwind sat, King Varian silently stood. The effect was immediate. The shouting died. The two night elves and Genn stared at Varian, whose face revealed nothing of his intentions. "Members of the Alliance, my good night elf hosts, I'd like to speak." Even Prince Anduin appeared uncertain as to what his father planned,
although he did not seem worried, only curious. Tyrande signaled for attention, then said, "Stormwind has asked to speak. Please go on, King Varian." The ex-gladiator and slave brooded for a moment. Finally he said, "Everyone knows that there's no love lost between Stormwind and Gilneas. Everyone knows why." Utter quiet fell upon the assembly. Genn's expression was unreadable as he waited for Varian to go on, but his ears lay flat in concern. A Sentinel suddenly stood behind the high priestess. Tyrande touched Malfurion's hand again, and he nodded to indicate that he would keep the proceedings going. The archdruid understood that whatever it was that would make someone interrupt the high priestess at such a delicate time had to be as significant as the murders of the two Highborne. A third? he wondered. Praying that it was not so, the archdruid leaned forward so as to indicate to Varian that while Tyrande might have to leave, it was no slight to Stormwind. Varian cocked his head as if to say he took no insult from the high priestess's departure. The lord of Stormwind then continued, "The benefit that an ally such as Gilneas offers us is obvious. While our skills in combat more than match those of the orcs and their allies, there's always been a hunger that the Horde has thrived upon that we-so civilized-no longer seem to have. The worgen offer us that righteous hunger to overcome all obstacles in battle, to keep the Alliance from splintering or merely sitting back as the orcs take one land after another. . . ." Genn's eyes widened, and even Malfurion could not help but feel his hope stir at such a speech. "I considered damned long and hard on this, I promise you," Varian told all. "Such an ally can help us easily hold the Horde's ambitions at bay, maybe even push them back!" The king indicated Genn and the Gilneans. "An ally of such honor, of such courage, I'd be more than pleased to fight beside!" His words brought cheer. Even the worgen could no longer restrain themselves, several of the younger ones giving out short howls. Varian now turned his attention to Malfurion. "Archdruid! You called before for a vote by acclamation, a vote I interrupted! My apologies for letting that happen! I'd meant to ask to speak sooner. . . ."
Smiling, Malfurion answered, "I would be happy to call for it again, King Varian-" "That won't be necessary." The human monarch's expression went through a stunning transformation. A dark cast spread over it as Varian eyed Genn Greymane. Varian spat in the Gilnean's direction. "Calling for it again would be a waste of time," the lord of Stormwind snarled at his counterpart below, "for I'd never give consent to allow these mongrels into the Alliance!" Shouts of consternation erupted, especially among the worgen. The one that was Eadrik took a step toward Varian, but Genn grabbed the young warrior's shoulder and pulled him back. The two worgen bared their teeth at one another, Eadrik quickly becoming cowed. "Honor and trust! These are what the Alliance needs, not these beasts that even when they paraded as men were lacking in both! What happens if they choose to cut themselves off once more? Will they even bother to give us warning? Can we trust them even to do that?" Varian snapped his fingers, and his retinue joined him on their feet, Anduin the last and most hesitant. "As I've already said to many, I find nothing worthy, nothing honorable, in this pack of hounds . . . and so I will never vote aye to their admission back into the fold!" And with that, Varian led Stormwind out of the summit as chaos erupted among the other representatives and Malfurion Stormrage watched all his hopes crumble before his eyes.
15
CHOICES
"Everyone! Remain seated, please!" The crowd, though, did not hear the archdruid. Everywhere, the various factions of the Alliance argued with one another as to what had just happened and what it meant to the summit as a whole. The voice of one night elf was easily drowned out by such a din. But Malfurion Stormrage was more than merely a night elf and more than merely a druid. Deafening thunder shook the assembly, and a single brilliant bolt of lightning right before the archdruid's position guaranteed that all attention returned to him. "You know my feelings on this situation," he said to them. "And I can assure all of you that this is not over." "You know my feelings on this situation," he said to them. "And I can assure all of you that this is not over." No one argued, although in many eyes he read disagreement. Malfurion looked to Genn Greymane to reassure him, only to find that the worgen had slipped out as swiftly and silently as the wolves they resembled. Concealing his own dismay, the archdruid pressed: "I will attend to this matter. For the moment, I call for a vote to end the summit for today and invite all representatives and their retinues to partake of the splendor of Darnassus." "Sounds like a good notion tae me! Me throat's parched from all this politickin'," Kurdran bellowed. "If it means gettin' some ale an' food faster, it's got me vote!" The dwarf's lusty response eased the situation, and the vote to end for the
day passed without further question as to whether there would be a second day. As the assembly dispersed, Malfurion summoned one of the Sentinels flanking his and Tyrande's seats. "Did the high priestess inform you as to why she had to leave?" "No, Archdruid." "Do you know where she went?" "The temple, I believe." Malfurion thought for a moment. "Please take a message to her. Tell her that I will be there as soon as I can, but that I must go speak with the king of Stormwind. Tell her that he voted against Gilneas, but I believe there is still hope. Do you have that?" "Yes, Archdruid!" "Go now, then!" The Sentinel saluted sharply, then rushed off. Malfurion took a breath, using the moment to organize his thoughts. The vision insists that Varian is the one, the archdruid thought with much frustration. Perhaps he is, but the vision does not have to deal with his obstinacy! He must be convinced . . . or, despite visions, the Alliance must find someone else! A determined look crossed his features. Varian Wrynn would listen. He went in pursuit of Stormwind's bitter king.
Malfurion likely felt betrayed, and Varian could not blame him, but the night elf had been presumptuous to think that he could convince the lord of Stormwind to change his mind. The king of Gilneas had much blood on his hands-human blood. Where had he been when Lordaeron had beseeched others for aid during the Third War? True, Stormwind had not directly participated in the war, but it had been a strong supporter of the Alliance. Stormwind had also been going through much more turmoil at that time . . . and Varian had been at the heart of most of that turmoil. Already a king at eighteen due to his father's assassination, he had been trying to oversee the kingdom's reconstruction when he had been politically outmaneuvered after his wife's death by the foul sorcery of Lady Katrana Prestor . . . who, in truth, had been the black dragon Onyxia. And when Varian had sailed at Lady Jaina's suggestion to Theramore for a summit, he had been kidnapped and subsequently lost his memory.
No, Varian felt that he could not be blamed for Stormwind's inability to do
more for the Alliance. Genn had been his own man and fully in charge when he had refused to answer the call more than once. He had built his damnable wall to seal off Gilneas; then, during the Third War, he had not deigned to contribute so much as a token force. That last affront had been too great even for some of his own people, who had taken up the challenge themselves and formed the valiant Gilneas Brigade. Varian felt no satisfaction for what he had said, but neither did he have any remorse. Genn Greymane had only gotten what he had much too long deserved. "Tomorrow we sail home," he informed the others as they neared their quarters. "Father-" "Not now, Anduin." In what was an uncustomary anger, the prince waved off the rest of the party. Those assigned to guard the royal family's quarters hesitated, but Anduin stared them down until they, too, left. They all knew that look. They had seen it often in the father but never in the son, until now. Ignoring what Anduin was doing, Varian entered their quarters. He seized the bottle of night elven wine he had started just before the summit and drank from it. "Where're you, Broll?" Varian muttered. The one thing that he had hoped would come of this fiasco of a gathering was a short reunion with the brawny druid who had fought beside him as a gladiator. Broll, though, was on some mission for Malfurion, yet another reason for the king to be annoyed with his hosts. "Father . . ." "I said not now, Anduin-" "Yes. Now." For a boy barely in his teens, Anduin's tone was measured and strong . . . and full of disappointment. Putting down the bottle, Varian faced him. "I did what needed to be done. You'll understand that when you're king." "I understand that you're still living in the past, Father. That you can't ever seem to escape it. People change. People can redeem themselves. You've not given Genn Greymane any chance, and in doing that, you've also condemned the rest of his kingdom-"
"They're fools enough to follow his lead despite the bloodshed and horror his choices have caused; they can follow him through this." "You don't mean that. Don't you see-" "Enough!" The outburst surprised Varian as much as it did his son. Anduin deflated. Varian read the immense sadness filling his son. The prince headed toward his room. "Anduin-" "Good night, Father. I pray you'll understand some day." Not quite certain as to what his son meant by that, Varian returned to the wine. Then, thinking better of it, he stepped back outside. There he found his guards anxiously awaiting. "Safe to go in," he jested. "I'll stay out here for a moment." They did not argue. Varian felt some sympathy for the men, who wanted to do their duty but were constantly being dismissed by their charges. He would reward them when the party returned to Stormwind. "Varian." "Oh, by all that's holy, am I allowed no peace?" The king turned to face Malfurion. "I said my lot back at the induction! There's nothing left to discuss!" The night elf's brow rose at this unexpected outburst. "There is much left to discuss, if I may be so bold. I am aware of why you said what you did and the right you had to say it. The summit, though, must continue, and I-" "Your summit's failed. You should know that. Failed like so much . . . " Varian looked off as he spoke, his thoughts turning to distant memory, not the evening's events. The shift did not go unnoticed by the archdruid. In a calm, quiet tone, he replied, "Failure is not always the end of things. It can be a method of learning to better succeed in other ways. Cenarius knows I have met with failure enough myself, if I may use my brother-and perhaps the worgen themselves-as examples. I can also appreciate the troubles you have struggled with, and I know the blame you still lay upon yourself for them. You still think that you could have saved Tiffin from the riot or somehow prevented Deathwing's own daughter, Onyxia, from stealing your kingdom while in the guise of Lady Prestor! Neither of those events could have been prevented by you-" "Couldn't they? Easy to talk so, after the fact and so far removed, Archdruid, but you weren't involved in those troubles! My wife was killed by a brickbat! A
good man, Reginald Windsor, was burned alive by the damned dragon's breath! I let agents of the Defias capture me, and in my absence, my son, my only son, was left defenseless and abandoned! I will not let that happen again! Ever!" "You were not-" Varian thrust a condemning finger in the night elf's face. "You've no right to speak of any of this, anyway! What do you even understand of the kind of horrors I've seen and suffered? Two wars came and passed while you cheerfully meditated and wandered that accursed Emerald Dream! Two wars in which countless lives were lost! You never saw the sacrifices Stormwind had to face, much less the rest of Azeroth, while Greymane sat back and did absolutely nothing! Nothing! You druids preach of the harmony of the world and the creatures on it, but harmony is easy to ask for when you don't have to struggle to survive like the rest of us!" "I understand more than you think," the archdruid started. "I have faced war and strife too. When the Burning Legion first invaded-" "You must reach back ten thousand years for your example?" Varian interrupted. "And what about something a bit more recent . . . or relevant?" The pair stood in silence, their unblinking gazes fixed upon one another. Malfurion radiated calmness, which only served to increase Varian's frustration. The night elf considered, then tried a different tack. "Much of what you say is true; I will not deny that. I have made many mistakes, but I have sought to learn from them, learned to accept my shortcomings, and strived to do better for those around me. That is something a druid, gladiator, or ruler should always do." It was not by accident that the night elf mentioned Varian's past role. Without saying anything direct, he reminded the king that, while Malfurion had been elsewhere during the most recent troubles, so had Varian. Stormwind had suffered for many years without its rightful monarch to guide it, first for a decade when Onyxia had used her magic to influence Varian following Tiffin's death, and then after his kidnapping. While Varian had not had any choice in either incident, the fact that the king often yearned for a return to the days when he only had to deal with his own immediate future was something that the night elf would not let be forgotten at the moment. "Has Genn done anything so terrible other than seek to do what he thought best for his people?" the archdruid went on. "Gilneas has suffered deeply and
more than once because of those choices. Genn regrets that and has offered to do everything he can to make amends. Do not judge him as you judge yourself, Varian. He will never stand a chance of redeeming himself, if that is the case." Varian grunted. "If that's all you can say to try to convince me to change my vote, you've wasted your breath, Archdruid! Stormwind leaves tomorrow. Whatever the rest of you want to do after that is your own choice." "Varian . . ." "For a place surrounded by forest, it's damned hard for a man to even get a breath of air! I've said all I intend! If you will excuse me . . . " The king all but shoved past the archdruid and headed toward the edge of Darnassus. He had not gone far when he heard footsteps behind him. The sound served to agitate him further. "Are you so desperate, night elf?" he snapped as he turned. "The great archdruid-" Yet, it was not Malfurion but rather Anduin who had followed his father. "Anduin . . . I thought you'd gone to bed-" "No . . . I was up. . . . " There was something secretive in the prince's voice. "I heard voices . . . I heard everything." "With the archdruid? You heard nothing that matters. We still leave tomorrow-" "I'm not going with you." The statement sounded so fantastic, so ridiculous, that at first Varian had to think whether he had actually heard his son speak it. Incredulous, he said, "Go get some sleep. We leave early." Anduin gave him a look that Varian usually reserved for himself when dealing with fool-headed courtiers. "You never listen to me. Please listen now, Father. I am not going with you." "You're tired! You-" Anduin looked exasperated. "I should've done what I had planned, but I started to have second thoughts until I heard you and Archdruid Stormrage arguing! He couldn't make you see sense any more than I ever could, and he's lived more than ten thousand years!" "Age doesn't mean wisdom," Varian retorted, annoyed that the night elf should have more of his son's respect than he. "I'm afraid I know that, Father." The moment Anduin said it, he looked as if
he regretted it. "I've not come to renew our argument. I went to my quarters and started to write you a letter explaining everything." "Son . . . what-" The prince held up a hand for silence, again very much mimicking his father's stance. "I'm no warrior. We both know that. I've said it more than once. I'll never be you. My path lies elsewhere. . . ." "You're heir to the throne!" Varian insisted, using whatever course he could to convince his only child that he was being absurd. "I'm not abandoning Stormwind, but I need to leave to complete what I've begun." Despite being only thirteen summers, at the moment Anduin sounded like a much older person. "I started it with High Priest Rohan in Ironforge. You know what he said about me. Even you agreed with him about my potential." "The Light can help you when you come to rule Stormwind, but it's only a tool, like-" "The Light is no tool. The Light is." Anduin smiled softly. "Someday, I'll make you understand that too. Father, I never felt more alive than during my training in Ironforge! Just think of it! As a priest of the Light, I could do so much more for our people-" "As king, you have the ultimate ability!" Varian's heart pounded. Of all that was happening, this was the one thing with which he could not cope. His son would come home with him. There would be an end to this talk about the Light, clearly a misguided influence. Varian would see to it that Anduin would overcome his lack of sufficient battle skills and train to become a proper ruler! "Father?" Anduin's smile faded. "You aren't listening. Fine. I tried." The boy turned to leave. Something snapped in Varian. He saw his beloved Tiffin again with their infant son snuggled in her arms. Tiffin faded away, leaving only the child . . . and then the child began to fade away. Varian could not let that happen. Without thinking, he lunged forward, snaring Anduin's arm. The prince let out a cry. Some of the overwhelming fear faded, and Varian realized that he was crushing Anduin's arm. "I-I-" The king released his grip. Anduin, his face filled with shock, grasped at his injured arm. He knew as well as his father that Varian not only could strangle a foe with one hand, but had several times. Few men there were who could match the strength of the legendary Lo'Gosh.
And now, in a fit of utter madness, he had used that same might, however briefly, against his defiant son. . . . "I-Anduin-" Varian could not summon words. The person most precious to him in all the world stood horrified at the sight of him. "I never meant-" Their guards suddenly came running. Varian could only guess that they had heard Anduin's cry and feared for the prince's life. "Your Majesty!" called the captain. "Did someone attack the two of you?" "It's all right," Anduin interjected, rubbing his arm. "There's no danger . . . is there, Father?" "No . . ." Anduin turned to leave again. Varian started to reach for him, but stopped the moment it appeared that the guards would follow his example and try to keep the prince from wandering away. "Where are you going, Anduin?" The prince paused and looked over his shoulder at his father. "To Velen. I'm going with him and the draenei when they depart." It did not startle the king, but did sting him. The Prophet could probably speak far easier with his son than he could. "Did you-have you discussed this with him?" "I talked to him about resuming my studies of the Light." "You can do that back in Stormwind with Archbishop Benedictus!" Varian did not care how he looked to the guards. This was his son and he was losing him. Anduin's brow furrowed at mention of the archbishop. "Benedictus . . . is not right for this. . . . I can't explain that. I just know. For what I need to learn, I need to go elsewhere. Rohan even once told me that." The king had not been aware of that little fact. He silently cursed the dwarf, silently cursed Velen . . . and then finally himself. "They can take my things to the ship, Father." "Velen may not take you with him to the draenei capital." Anduin paused to consider this, and Varian's hopes stirred. Then: "If he won't take me with him, he'll know that I have to go elsewhere to achieve what I must. Good-bye, Father." "Don't-" The former gladiator bit off what he was going to say, for the guards, more aware of what was happening, looked as if all they waited for was
the smallest signal. Even a hint by their king that they should step in and surround the prince would have served enough as a direct order. His decision not to let them act brought the sad smile back to Anduin's face. "Thank you." "I-I swear by your mother that I'll never hurt you again, Anduin. Not in any way!" He started toward his son with the intention of hugging him. The prince's eyes widened. He stepped out of reach, then replied, "I know." Anduin walked off in what Varian could only imagine was the direction of the Prophet's quarters. The king watched until his son was no longer visible to him, aware all the while that the last thing he had seen in Anduin's eyes was a shadow of fear that Varian might, after all, hurt him. "Your Majesty . . . ," the captain hesitantly began. "Are you certain we shouldn't-" "You're dismissed," he responded curtly. "All of you." Aware of his mood, the guards obeyed swiftly and without question. Varian was at last left alone. And only then did he realize just how much he was afraid he would be that way for the rest of his life.
Some of the certainty with which he had left his father began to evaporate the farther from the king Anduin got. Yet, something continued to urge him on his course.
He knew somehow that he would find Velen in the Temple Gardens again. The draenei had just begun to meditate and so was not disturbed by the youth's sudden appearance. But that did not mean that Velen had no inkling as to why Anduin had come. "You spoke with your father," the Prophet murmured. "I sense the troubles between you." Anduin saw no reason not to be blunt. "Velen, I know my path now. I want to go with you." The draenei looked perturbed. "How did you find out?" "What do you mean?" "Matters have arisen that take me elsewhere. I planned to choose another priest to act as representative of the draenei and leave in the morning after giving my farewells to our hosts."
His revelation cemented Anduin's course. "I knew nothing. I knew only that I can learn best if I come with you." "Your father . . ." "I've told him." The Prophet frowned. "Perhaps you should reconsider. The path of the Light is not a simple one, and you are young. Gifted, yes, and I say that honestly. Come to me in three years, perhaps-" "If you try to leave me behind, I'll follow. I know that I've chosen right. I feel it." "So young . . . and yet so old," the draenei remarked with a sigh. He noticed the youth rub his arm. "You have an injury. Let me help you." The Prophet placed an open hand on the area in question. The Light emanated from the draenei's palm, a wondrous glow no larger than an apple yet radiating so much majesty. It spread to the injured region. The pain in Anduin's arm quickly receded, becoming little more than a memory in but the blink of an eye. And as that happened, Anduin felt a stirring in his heart. Emotions arose, feelings of love and forgiveness. Along with those feelings, an image formed, one not of memory, but rather imagination. Anduin only knew his mother from pictures, and so the vision he had of her was one formed throughout his young life. In that vision, she was glorious, comforting. . . . "You love her very much, your mother," Velen murmured. He did not bother to explain how he knew what Anduin was thinking. Velen was the Prophet, after all. "She died when I was a baby, but all I've seen and heard from my father and others of the court makes me feel I know her . . . and love her." The draenei nodded. "And you love your father much also." Anduin swallowed, recalling the pain and the constant frustration with the king . . . but also all that Varian had sought to do for him. "Of course. Whatever our disagreements . . ." Velen lowered his palm. The Light faded from both his hand and the prince. The emotions faded, too, though they never completely vanished. "And that is in great part why the Light touches you so deep." The Prophet smiled slightly. "Very well, Anduin. We leave come sunlight."
16
A MESSENGER'S RESOLVE
Malfurion rushed back to the temple, his sense of failure with Varian compounded by the knowledge that the Sentinel who had spoken with Tyrande at the summit-subsequently drawing the high priestess away-no doubt had news of some other disaster. He suspected that it might concern the Highborne, but prepared himself for anything at this point. To his surprise, it was not one of the priestesses who greeted him but rather one of his own. The anxious druid bowed low as Malfurion approached. "Parsis!" The other druid was skilled, capable of shifting to storm crow form, and, given a bit more seasoning, could someday become an archdruid of high standing. Naturally, Malfurion never quite mentioned this future he saw to the younger druid himself. "You were assigned to Ashenvale! Why are you here?" "It is not for me to answer that, Shan'do," Parsis respectfully responded, the younger druid clearly exhausted. "There is another who has more than earned that right." Malfurion did not question him further. Parsis led him to the area where but recently Shalasyr's body had lain shortly after Jarod had brought it to Darnassus. He heard voices within, the voices of priestesses at prayer. The archdruid glanced at Parsis and saw the younger night elf look disturbed. Something had changed for the worse since he had left this place. As they stepped inside, Tyrande turned from where she had been leading four other senior priestesses in the prayer. The light of Elune shone down upon not only her and the priestesses but also a figure lying on the platform between them. It was a Sentinel. Malfurion did not recognize her. Her violet skin had paled
considerably, not a good sign. In silence, he joined his mate. Tyrande leaned close and whispered, "Her name is Aradria Cloudflyer. She is a courier from Ashenvale." "A wounded courier?" Malfurion did not like the direction this was taking. The high priestess started to continue, but the Sentinel suddenly moaned. Her eyes fluttered open and she gazed up at the pair, eventually fixing on Malfurion. "Arch-Archdruid . . . you know, then . . ." She fought to shift so she could face him better, and in doing so revealed a long, wicked scar running across her upper torso. Based on what Malfurion could see of it, it was a wonder that she was still alive. Other, smaller scars decorated what he could see of her body, but the huge one was clearly what had done the worst to her. "The irony is, her own glaive did it," Parsis muttered in his other ear. "She fell upon it during a struggle with several orcs. She had slain at least two before that happened." "What was she doing in orc territory? And why bring her here?" "She was not in orc territory. She was well on her way here with an urgent missive from Commander Haldrissa." The archdruid looked to Tyrande for verification of the dread news. She sadly nodded. "They-they snuck behind the lines . . . ," Aradria rasped, evidently hearing well despite her condition. "You must rest," the high priestess advised her. "Your will and strength will aid in your recovery as much as the blessing of the Mother Moon." Aradria coughed harshly. Blood spattered Tyrande's gown but she made no attempt to either move out of the way or wipe it clean. There was only concern for the messenger. "I p-prayed to her . . . as I lay there, fading," the Sentinel managed. "I prayed th-that if she let me survive long enough to do my d-duty, then I-I would be gglad to give my life after. She granted that-that p-prayer." "I found her while communing with the forest some distance west of our outpost," Parsis explained. "The trees were unsettled about some event that had taken place nearby. I searched around . . . and then I came upon her." The druid quickly described finding the bodies. Parsis had found at least four
dead orcs, two of them ripped apart in a fashion that could only mean that they had been the victims of the hippogryph. "P-poor Windstorm," Aradria murmured. "He was such a loyal friend." She coughed again. Tyrande took a cloth and wiped the Sentinel's lips clean. "I did what I could for her, but she had been bleeding for so long." The druid looked ashamed. Tyrande shook her head. "No one could have done more, Parsis, not even one of the Sisterhood." "He-he also brought me here . . . " the Sentinel said. "I healed her as best I could, then shifted into storm crow form," Parsis explained. "It was a very strenuous flight, but I knew not to stop." "They t-took the message," Aradria continued, gulping in air as she spoke. "But I knew-knew what the commander wanted to s-say. . . ." "Save your strength," Tyrande insisted. "Let me tell them what you said to me." Aradria nodded, then shut her eyes. The high priestess quickly related Commander Haldrissa's observations and concerns. The depth of the Horde's incursions into western Ashenvale startled Malfurion and even Parsis, who had no doubt heard it before. All the while the priestesses quietly prayed for the courier who had risked so much to bring this news while it was still fresh. "I am inclined to take everything that the commander mentioned-and Aradria swore by-as at least a very expert guess and likely very much the truth," the high priestess finished. "Does Shandris know Aradria is here?" "I have sent someone to tell her." Tyrande returned her attention to the stricken Sentinel. "We cannot begin to thank you enough for all you-" The courier's chest no longer rose and fell. Bending near, Tyrande let her hand pass over Aradria. "She is . . . no more. She must have died at least a minute or two ago." "She almost looks as if she is smiling slightly," Parsis said, choking a little at the end. "I wanted to give her a little more time to rest, but she insisted. . . ." The high priestess straightened. "She asked something of Elune, and the Mother Moon saw how worthy she was. To be frank, I was also very surprised that she made it to us, much less lived long enough to tell us everything." "Then it behooves us to see to it that her sacrifice was not in vain," Shandris
called from the entrance. The sternness in her voice was due to Aradria's loss. Shandris considered her Sentinels part of her. "I did my best, General," Parsis blurted, somewhat cowed by the famous warrior. "I know you did, druid. I personally accepted your assignment to Ashenvale." She strode up to the body. "And I remember her. A skilled rider . . . almost as good as I. Haldrissa chose the right person to carry the news." To Tyrande and Malfurion, Shandris added, "We will of course have to send a force as soon as possible." "What about the summit?" Tyrande asked her husband. "We turn it in another direction. We brought everyone together to try to strengthen the Alliance; this is exactly why." Shandris respectfully touched the dead Aradria on the shoulder. "With your permission, I have four of my best waiting outside to take her body. We will give her a proper send-off." The high priestess nodded. "Go ahead. Her name will be sung in the temple." "I appreciate that." Shandris whistled two short notes and the other Sentinels entered. The high priestess and Malfurion stepped to the side. The priestesses looked as one to their leader, who gave them permission to depart. Parsis bowed to the archdruid and his wife. "If I may, I think I should go with General Shandris. I have more recent knowledge of the land there and I suspect she will want to hear it." "My very thought," the general commented. "Come along." Before they could depart, Malfurion asked, "Parsis, there was another druid assigned along with you-" "Kara'din, Archdruid." "Did you contact him at any point?" The younger druid looked more anxious. "Not immediately, I am sorry to say. I was-caught up in the matter of the courier. I did try to during the flight, but for some reason could not touch his mind! Forgive me! I wanted to tell you that, but-" Malfurion could certainly not fault Parsis, who looked as if he were about to collapse despite his insistence that he go with Shandris. "Fret not. Tell the general everything you know, then get some rest. Do you understand?"
"Yes . . . yes, Archdruid." "I will not hold him any longer than necessary," Shandris promised. The Sentinels reverently lifted Aradria's body onto a wooden stretcher, then carried her away. Shandris and the druid took up positions behind them. Tyrande murmured a short prayer for the valiant courier as the Sentinels disappeared with the body. Then, frowning deeper, she said to Malfurion, "I was told what Varian did. I was stunned. What happened after he left? Did you go after him?" "I went to talk with him. . . . It did not go any better than the voting did. We cannot depend on him to become the leader we have been seeking, Tyrande. There is no time now." "It is more important than ever, my love! Do you not understand? Elune foresaw this! Varian must guide us in this darkest hour!" The archdruid grimaced. "He cannot even guide himself where his son is concerned. I heard them having an argument before I dared approach their quarters. That boy has had to grow up a lot. He may be young in human years, but he is much older in human spirit. Varian is going to have more trouble with him, I think." "Elune is not wrong, my love!" He mulled things over, then sighed. "There may be one hope. There may be a way to make him come to terms with all that he has been through and by that learn to forgive others, especially Genn, for the mistakes they in turn have made." "What are you going to do?" Malfurion took her in his arms and hugged her tight. "First, continue to have faith in you. Second . . . I think I need to take Varian on a hunt. . . ."
"Are you better?"
Jarod stirred. His body felt stiff and his shoulders ached when he moved his arms, but otherwise the only reminder of the horrific torture that he had suffered was the memory of it. That was more than enough for him. "I am well enough," he responded cautiously. "Where am I?" "My quarters," Maiev answered. She squatted down next to her brother, who lay on a reed mat that he expected served as her bed. She handed him a mug filled with wine.
"Thank you." Jarod's eyes quickly scanned the chamber. As he expected, Maiev's home was all but devoid of personal effects save for a morbidly fascinating array of weaponry set upon the wall opposite him. Jarod recalled his sister's interest in blades even before she had joined the Sisterhood and noted that, in addition to an exceptional collection of night elven ones, she had several that had obviously been obtained from other races. "What happened to me?" "You ran into a trap. One intended for a Highborne, no doubt. Some people would have died from what you went through." "I thought I did." She found the comment amusing. "You barely got a scratch." There was pride in her tone, Jarod realized, pride in his stamina. "Neva informs me that you were coming to see me," Maiev prompted. He told her his part in the grisly discovery and the request by Tyrande and Malfurion that he assist his sibling in her investigation. Maiev grunted her agreement with the suggestion. "Looked over the body you stumbled upon," she responded, her tone turning briefly to amusement again when saying the last. "Just like the first. Someone is very dedicated. Cannot say I blame them. Who would want the Highborne a part of us again? You?" "The high priestess and archdruid want it to happen." Maiev chuckled. "And you? Have you found forgiveness for the Highborne? Truthfully?" He could not lie to her. "I think that they have much for which to make amends, but I argued for tolerance at the end of the War of the Ancients and I still do now. I will trust in Tyrande and Malfurion on this. They have our best interests at heart." "Naturally." Maiev rose, then extended a hand. "Done with that?" Jarod had not noticed that he had finished his drink. He handed the mug to her, then tried to push himself to his feet. "Take it easy, Brother." That only served to make him more determined to stand. Taking a deep breath, the former officer straightened. "Very good," his sister remarked. "If you are so recovered, I guess we will get back to the task, hmm?" He thought of the body. "Did you inspect the victim?"
"For what little time they let me. That one Highborne, Var'dyn-you know him?-he had his people spirit their dead comrade away even quicker than they did the last. I suppose that they were not happy with some of the inspecting we did of that corpse." "Maiev . . ." "Ha! We did not cut it up any more than the assassin did, so do not fret! I think they were afraid I might find some sorcerous trinket of theirs and keep it." She sneered. "As if I would want anything to do with their powers. No, we are going back to the scene of your little incident. Come on. . . ." He did not argue with her logic. The trek brought them back through the training area, where Neva again happened to be. She immediately joined them, taking up a place on Jarod's other side and occasionally brushing up against him in a manner that made him nervous. "You were chasing something, so Neva said. Did you see it?" "No. Whoever it was proved too quick at every turn." "Whoever? A person? Definitely not an animal by accident?" Jarod hesitated for a moment, then answered, "No. A person. He talked to me, even helped me." The two females halted. Maiev leaned close. "Tell me." Jarod described the interaction and how very apologetic his quarry had been throughout it all. "So he saves you, then rushes off. Probably realized that you were not his desired prey, one of the Highborne." "He said he had not known that the trap was there. . . . And why was it? What would a Highborne be doing near this spot?" Jarod indicated the area just before them, which they had finally reached. Neva immediately knelt by the spot he assumed was where he had been lying. She inspected the nearest tree trunk. "Here is something we did not notice before. Bits of fur." "Interesting." Maiev examined them. "Well . . . it is fur. And you were helped here by someone . . . someone furred?" He could easily see where she was heading with her comment. "You think it was a worgen?" "Very likely. The worgen have been snooping around the edges of the city quite a bit," his sister offered. "They have been given permission to enter and
they do, now and then, but they seem to have developed an interest in skulking around too." The former guard captain bluntly asked, "Do you think that they are the ones who killed the Highborne?" "I do not know what reason they could have-not yet-but they could also be acting as the dupes of some other party. I am eliminating no one. The notes were written in the same archaic style." "Then it must be a night elf at the heart of this," he decided. "Someone who lost a loved one during the war." "Well, that narrows it down," his sibling cut in sarcastically. "I would like to talk with that worgen again." Jarod tried to recall any detail he could, the voice his most significant clue. "Find out why he was lurking around here in the first place. It might not have anything to do with the Highborne, though-" Maiev grunted. "Oh, it must! There is no other reasonable explanation." He could find none, either. "Where do the worgen live? I heard something, but I am still not quite sure. . . ." "Oh, we know where they are. What do you say, Neva?" The other Watcher managed to slip her arm around Jarod's. Leaning her head close to his, she replied, "Now is a good time as any." Jarod was puzzled. "For what?" Maiev laughed. "To investigate the wolves, of course." " 'Wolves' . . . " He finally understood. "Is that all right?" "The high priestess and archdruid have given me the authority to follow through this case wherever it might lead. The worgen will just have to behave themselves." She led them off. Neva pulled Jarod along until, in order to avoid further discomfort around the other Watcher, he lengthened his stride and hurried after his sister. At first, their trek was simple, almost seeming so much like a carefree walk that Jarod wondered if his sister was playing a game with him and did not truly want his assistance. However, once Maiev reached a crooked oak, she suddenly grew serious again. Neva put a finger to her lips, not that Jarod needed the warning. He could already hear something far ahead . . . and was instantly aware that if he could hear them, then they might be able to hear the three
intruders. "The main encampment is still some distance," Maiev whispered. "But recently a number of the wolves have been coming to this region. Guess they like the hunting here." She led the other two across a small creek and toward a rise. Not for the first time did Jarod marvel at the landscape. It was very easy to forget that this entire place was all atop a gargantuan tree. "Keep low," Maiev ordered. "We are very close now." He looked at her. "Are they hostile? I thought we would just announce-" "Be quiet." His sister moved a step ahead. It suddenly occurred to Jarod that neither he nor his companions had taken any weapons with them. Why he had not thought of that beforehand he could only chalk up to residual fogginess due to his near death. However, that in no way reassured him. If the worgen were, after all, that dangerous . . . "We need to turn around," he muttered. "This is not the way to go about this-" Neva suddenly stiffened. At the same time Maiev whirled to her right. A savage, panting form lunged from behind a tree there. Another leapt out from the opposing direction. Both landed on all fours just a few feet from the night elves, then stood. They were immediately joined by others as the worgen surrounded the trio. For the first time Jarod had a good look at the long fangs and the sharp claws and the fact that, even while hunched over, all the worgen stood taller than the night elves. The worgen were also at least half again as broad and likely outweighed even him by several pounds, all of it taut muscle. Jarod remained still, silently and swiftly analyzing the movements of the worgen in order to judge whether they intended to attack. Maiev and Neva, on the other hand, fell into battle stances and all but dared the worgen to come at them. Jarod frowned at the two females' reactions but said nothing. Nearly a dozen worgen now surrounded them. Their intensity amazed Jarod. A male worgen stalked up to him. Nostrils flaring, the male sniffed Jarod carefully. The deep brown eyes-the most "human" feature of the otherwise bestial figure-narrowed slightly. The male moved on to Neva. Her face was a mask. He sniffed at her, albeit in a more perfunctory manner. He turned from Neva. Jarod felt as if the worgen
already recognized her scent. When the apparent leader stopped at Maiev, there was a noticeable pause. As with Neva, the worgen seemed to recognize something in Jarod's sister, as if they had met previously. The lips of the creature pulled back, revealing better the sharp teeth. Fearing for Maiev, Jarod stepped forward. That brought the leader's attention back to him. Jarod then noticed that, despite looking as they did, the worgen still wore clothes. Most of them were loose-fitting or open and in general kept in good condition. The garments made for a contrast to the raw force the worgen radiated. "Come to spy on us again . . . ," the male growled, his voice otherwise surprisingly normal. "Do we amuse you?" It took Jarod a moment to understand that the question was focused at Maiev. She smiled defiantly at the leader. "We are here in the performance of our duty to the high priestess. You know that." "You found nothing to learn here last time." "Things change." The leader's ears twitched in annoyance. "The king will speak with your high priestess and the archdruid." "Feel free." The worgen as a whole growled. They sounded more frustrated than angry, however. This argument had evidently taken place once before. "You say things change," the leader rasped. "What?" "My brother here was nearly killed by a trap set for the Highborne." Maiev did not explain the Highborne to the worgen, confirming what she had said earlier about their being aware of the spellcasters' existence. "He was chasing a worgen at the time." The male did not look at Jarod. "Proof?" "We found fur caught in the bark of the tree where my brother was lying." This garnered a derisive laugh from the entire pack. "Many animals in the forest." He displayed his claws. "The hunting is good." "So long as you are only hunting deer and the like, not certain other prey," countered Maiev. The leader turned to Jarod again. The long muzzle came within an inch of the night elf's nose. Jarod could smell the carnivore's thick breath, but did not
show any distaste for the odor. "Tell me," the worgen demanded. "You saw this one of ours?" "No . . . I was in too much pain." "Hmmph. You would be feeling no pain at all anymore if he had attacked you as you claim." Jarod met the gaze steadily. "I never said he attacked me. He pulled me free of the trap. I do not know how, but he did. He was even sorry that I got caught in it." The ears of his questioner twitched in thought. The worgen leader remained in front of Jarod, but glanced at Maiev. "A different story from what you hinted. So a worgen on the hunt happens nearby. Out of respect to the high priestess and archdruid, he retreats when discovering night elves so close. When a fool follows, he even rescues the fool, and for that we're judged monsters. . . ." There were accompanying growls from the others. Jarod tensed, expecting to have to try to fight his way free even despite the impossible odds. "We are only investigating every possible situation," Maiev countered. "If you have nothing to hide, you have nothing to fear, right?" The worgen leader bared his teeth again. "You wish to question us, you come to us. It's dangerous to sneak about here. Worse things than traps for magi. Younger worgen can get caught up in the hunt; they might leap before they realize that it's not a deer." His ears straightened. "By then . . . it could be too late." He made a dismissive gesture with one clawed hand. The other worgen moved back from the night elves. Jarod kept a wary eye on the worgen until they had moved a sufficient distance from the night elves, then joined Maiev and Neva. The leader of the worgen party snarled. As one, the lupine creatures slipped back among the trees, moving as silently as any skilled night elf. Jarod exhaled. "That was too close." "We were never in any real danger," his sister countered confidently. "For all their bluster, they are just a bunch of humans." He grew angry. "Humans with claws and very sharp teeth-and you knew that they would come for us!" "Easier than following after them. Think of it as a test. I wanted to see their reaction when I mentioned what happened to you. I saw enough. They know
something. More than they realize." "I would have liked to have known what you planned." "You might have changed your mind in coming. I wanted you here. Besides"-she slipped her hand behind her; when Maiev brought it forward again, her brother saw that she was now armed-"we were not so helpless as you thought." Neva imitated Maiev, revealing that both females were armed. Jarod snorted. This was the sister he remembered. Maiev would do anything to see her duty through to the end. It was something to remember while he helped discover the ones behind the assassinations of the Highborne. "It is likely a night elf behind this," he said with continued irritation. "Our people have a much better reason than the worgen to want the Highborne dead." Maiev began to head back toward Darnassus. "Oh, you are probably right on that. This will lead back to night elves. But the worgen . . . they need watching, too, do you not think?" Neva gave Jarod a coy smile as she followed Maiev. After a moment the former guard captain trailed after. He was still angry with his sibling for her recklessness, although in retrospect he could see from her colored history how such a trait could have developed over the millennia. In some ways he suspected that her recklessness had been the difference between life and death for Maiev. But I will not stand by while you do that again, Jarod swore. If they were to work together, Maiev would have to understand that her brother would be no one's fool, not even hers. Their success-and possibly the stable existence of their people-depended on her understanding him. It suddenly struck him that his anger at his sister made him feel more alive than any other moment after Shalasyr's death. Aware of Jarod's relationship with Maiev, Shalasyr would have found that amusing. Ahead of him, Maiev muttered something to Neva, then chuckled. That stirred up another subject, one that he doubted Maiev would have found so funny. Jarod had learned something of interest during the encounter with the worgen-something his sister would have liked to know. He had gradually recognized the voice of the leader of the group. It had been that of his rescuer. Jarod had not immediately made the connection due to the
fact that when this worgen had rescued him, he had done so in his human form, using fingers rather than claws to grasp the injured night elf. He had also whispered then, as opposed to the gruffer, more commanding tone used during this encounter. But even more important, there had been a look in the worgen's human eyes that had indicated that he, in turn, had understood that Jarod recognized him. Even despite that, the worgen had ordered them released. Jarod intended to find out why . . . and when he did, it would be without the impediment of his sister. Maiev would just have to wait until her brother returned from the worgen encampment. Of course, that was assuming that they would let him leave alive a second time.
17
INTO THE FOREST
The next day came, and still the outpost was not attacked. Haldrissa would have taken heart save for the fact that by now she knew better. The Horde was merely implementing the next stage of whatever plan its commander in Ashenvale had in mind. She already knew that whoever was in charge was high among the leadership, certainly picked by the new warchief, Garrosh Hellscream. An hour after dawn, the gates swung wide open and a force of mounted Sentinels supported by archers and warriors on foot rushed out to confront whoever might be there. Haldrissa led the charge herself, her nightsaber roaring eagerly as the scent of the orcs reached it. But although they found traces of the archers, there were no actual sightings of the Horde. It was as if they had melted back into shadow once their foul task had been accomplished. Denea was blunt in her assessment. "We should have charged out during the night. I knew we should have." Haldrissa ignored the slight to her decision. The commander considered her options again. Of all the outposts, the two most significant were her own-in great part due to its central proximity to the rest of those lining Alliance-held lands-and Silverwing. Silverwing was unique. It was a bastion of defense in, of all places, hostile territory, the Horde's outpost of Splintertree not all that far to the northeast. Even when the orcs had pushed forward elsewhere, Silverwing had prevailed. It maintained itself through the bravery of its fighters and a thin patch of ground connecting it to the rest of the Alliance territory. There had been no contact with Silverwing, but that did not mean that it had
fallen. The smoke that they had seen from their position had been more to the north. Silverwing was slightly more south and across the Falfarren River. Haldrissa suspected that the smoke came from one of the lesser outposts, likely Forest Song. She hoped that the defenders there had managed to hold, especially since she could do nothing for them at the moment. The fact that there had been no hint of Silverwing's downfall encouraged the commander, but she knew that she had to act fast. If they could link up with Silverwing, they would present the Horde with a more solidified front. There was no need to wait for word from Darnassus. It was clear that Aradria had perished even if her body had not been discovered by the supply wagons. There would be no help until communication could be reestablished and that would take some time. She already had three nightsaber riders heading west, but suspected that whatever the Horde commander had in mind would be unleashed before the capital could send help. "Silverwing . . . Denea, I need our force divided in two, one to defend here, another to march with us to Silverwing. This moment." "We ride there today?" "That depends on you." Haldrissa did not care if Denea took any offense at her words or tone. The commander had no more patience, and her second had to be reminded who was still in charge. Perhaps in order to prove that Haldrissa had underestimated her, Denea had the outpost's contingent divided up within the hour. Even still, it felt like much too long. The commander kept waiting for the Horde to suddenly attack again. They did not, but whether that was a good sign, she could not yet say. She considered leaving Denea in charge, but chose instead to appoint one of the other officers. Haldrissa would need her most efficient officers at the front, and Denea was certainly the best of those, ambitions aside. The column moved out cautiously, with scouts riding ahead and reporting back on a regular basis. The only traces of the Horde were footprints, and those tended to be so mixed in direction it was difficult to follow any trail from them. Haldrissa did not like the unpredictability of the Horde strategy of late. This was not the type of war that she was used to fighting. Whoever coordinated the enemy's efforts constantly left her guessing. She could only hope that her own decisions would counter whatever they planned. Though the world has changed so much, at least war should remain a comfortable
constant, Haldrissa mused darkly. She wished that they had already reached Silverwing. Knowing that they could then make a proper stand against whatever the orcs wanted to throw at them would go a great way toward easing her mind. Give her a clean, straightforward battle with all the accompanying traditions, not perplexing tricks such as the Horde was suddenly using. Give her war as it was meant to be.
There was war . . . and Varian could not have cared less.
His son had left him. Anduin had left him. How his opponents in the arenas would have mocked the onetime gladiator for his mournful state . . . had any of them survived. The great Lo'Gosh tearyeyed for his child. A messenger had delivered the news of war to Varian and his people at the same time that the other members of the Alliance had been notified. The high priestess had some notion of rushing a force to Ashenvale and had asked the others for whatever assistance they could muster on short notice. Naturally Stormwind would help, but that did not matter in the least to Varian. Azeroth meant nothing to him. Anduin had left him . . . and he knew that it was his fault that the boy had. This was just the latest failure on his part, the latest proof that he would have been better off having remained bereft of his memory and fighting day after day for his life against the other dregs of the world. Better yet, he should have died when his father had; then Tiffin would have never married him and been condemned as another victim of his cursed life. Anduin would have been safe, too, for he- He would have never existed. Swearing at himself, Varian downed the last of the wine. He yearned for some good Stormwind whiskey or something not so sweet as night elven wine. Still, enough of it would drown out his thoughts for a time. That essential mission in mind, Varian ordered his frustrated guards to find him more wine or dwarven ale. He, in turn, sat in a chair facing the quarters where Anduin had recently slept, and buried himself deep in his selfrecriminations. True to his word, the prince had left with the draenei. Varian's own
departure had been temporarily delayed. He did not want to return to Stormwind without his son . . . not yet. I've lost him, Tiffin. . . . I lost you and now I've lost him. . . . There was a knock at the door. His eyes still fixed on Anduin's quarters, the king frowned. His servants had orders to bring whatever alcohol they found right to him. That meant ignoring protocol about entering the presence of their ruler. The sooner he could drink himself deeper into oblivion, the better. "Come in, damn you!" he roared when they still did not enter. "And bring what drink you've found quickly!" The door opened at last, but the voice that followed was one of the last Varian wanted to hear. "I have brought no spirits, but thought there might be a way to raise yours." The king still did not turn away from his son's quarters. "You'll forgive me if I'm in no mood for company, not even yours." Malfurion walked around Varian, blocking his view. "Anduin would not want you like this, especially because of some argument with him. Neither would your wife." The king frowned. "Please leave, Archdruid." Undaunted, Malfurion said, "If it is not a talk you desire, perhaps you would like to find a way to more directly vent your frustrations." Despite himself, Varian was interested. "If you've something to keep me from thinking for a while, name it." "Something much better than all this drinking. A hunt." "A hunt?" He sat up. "You, a druid, want to take me on a hunt? Doesn't that go against your beliefs?" "The hunt is an essential part of nature. It keeps the balance. We do not condemn the bear-or the wolf-for its part in it, and if men, night elves, and others take but what they need and respect where that bounty comes from, there is no contradiction. Azeroth nourishes us and, in return, those of my calling aid it in whatever little fashion we can." "'Whatever little fashion' . . . I know the extent of your power, Archdruid." Malfurion shrugged. "I have been blessed with gifts, but they come with responsibility." Varian nodded. "The price of true leadership is to understand that all the advantages come with heavy responsibility. I know that too well."
"Enough of this talk, though. I only came to offer you respite through a hunt. If you are not interested . . ." The king rose. "Oh, I'm interested." "Good! We can gather your men-" This earned the archdruid a snort of derision. "I'm not like some of those overfed monarchs who play at hunting by having a hundred beaters frighten some poor beast out of the bush so that he and his pathetic courtiers can surround it and either hack it to death or fill it with enough arrows to make it look like a pincushion! That's not hunting; that's true barbarism that even the orcs wouldn't accept! No . . . I prefer to hunt alone, with just my bow and my stealth. If that's enough, I bring home food. If not, the beast proves himself my better." "A reasonable point." The night elf gestured to the door. "Then it will be just you and me." "You're going to hunt too? You can call the beasts right to you! What sort of hunting is that?" The archdruid simply smiled. "You do not know me if you think I would abuse my power in that manner. Come, we will see who fares best." Eager to do whatever he could to forget Anduin's flight, Varian did not hesitate any longer. He seized his bow and quiver from where they were stored and, with the night elf leading, gratefully abandoned his quarters. As they departed, two of his servants returned. Both had been successful in their efforts to procure wine or ale. "Leave those inside," the king decided, just in case the night elf's offer proved insufficient to fix what was ailing him. "The archdruid and I are going for a walk. Alone." The guards eyed the bow but, as usual, did not protest. Varian forgot them as he kept pace with the night elf. Already, doubts were creeping into him. Alone, he might find the hunt to his liking, but if he had to have the night elf at his side at all times, he could not pursue his quarry as he needed. That would only serve to stifle Varian. He was ready to turn around and head back to the wine and ale when at last they reached a segment of the forest far from any visible night elven structure. Malfurion let his guest view the area in silence. "Looks like good hunting territory," Varian admitted. He eyed the archdruid,
who was only armed with a staff. "You plan on using that thing?" In answer, Malfurion set it against a tree. "No, I prefer to hunt as the animals hunt . . . and as one." Now at last the human understood what the night elf intended. "You're going to become a cat!" "Is that fair enough a hunt?" Varian chuckled, surprising himself. "It still won't be enough, if you mean will you be more successful than me. Do we hunt together?" "I thought we would meet back here. I will hunt this direction," and he pointed slightly to the north. "And you can go that direction. I promise you will have plenty to pursue there." "Suits me." "Then the best of luck! May you find what you seek!" With that, the archdruid transformed. He slumped forward, falling upon all fours. His hands became padded paws with sharp claws and his garments melted into the ether, to be replaced by sleek, dark fur. His face widened and his nose and mouth became a blunt muzzle. A powerful nightsaber stood next to the king. "You'll still need a lot of luck to do better," Varian challenged, now completely caught up in the affair. The cat rumbled in what could only be called an amused tone, then lunged off among the trees. "Ha!" Varian did not let his opponent get very much of a leap ahead. The king darted into his area of the forest, his senses coming alive as he moved. Already he had the bow strung and an arrow nocked. The only other weapon was the knife he wore at his waist. That would only be needed if something happened to his bow or the prey survived his shot and he had to end its pain quickly. His ears picked up movement. Varian smelled deer. It was impossible for him to describe to others how he became during a hunt save that the king transformed into something more . . . free. Free. The deer was close. Varian tightened his grip on the string. He rarely needed more than one shot to down his prey. He felt obligated to do his best to honor the kill, just as the night elf had indicated he did.
Much of Varian's anger at Malfurion faded. The archdruid had found the one method by which to give the king some relief. He would thank Malfurion later - The deer suddenly bolted into view. It ran toward him, not the direction Varian had anticipated. The animal, a young stag, charged into him, forcing the king to leap out of the way. And as he did, he came face to face with another hunter. A worgen. The furred hunter looked more startled than Varian. The two faced off against one another as the stag fled to freedom. "You . . . ," rasped the worgen. "You're-" "Varian Wrynn!" snarled a hated voice. A second worgen burst into the area. His fur was frost white save for the head and mane, which retained some charcoal black. The newcomer's glittering blue eyes were filled with such bitterness that Varian instinctively held his bow ready. Behind the second worgen followed nearly a dozen others, all moving with a clear subservience to this later arrival. "You've got a lot of gall coming here!" As the second worgen spoke, he changed. He shrank slightly and his fur seemed to just dissipate. Genn Greymane gestured at the bow. "Fire away! You've already more or less struck me through the heart! My people will suffer for your choice-" Varian lowered the bow. "I'll not waste an arrow on you. Bad enough you've ruined my hunt! Did you hope to convince me to change my mind by coming here?" "You talk madness! We always hunt here! You're not far from our encampment and you know it!" "I don't-" The former gladiator realized that he had been outmaneuvered and he knew by whom. He looked around, no longer as furious with the Gilneans as he was with another. "Where are you, archdruid? You think this funny?" "'Archdruid'?" Genn looked baffled. "I do not find anything humorous about the last few days' events," Malfurion Stormrage replied from behind Varian. "As for Genn and the other worgen hunting here, the knowledge had completely slipped my mind." The archdruid was the image of innocence. Despite all the evidence to the
contrary, Varian found he could not bring himself to accuse the night elf outright. Glancing at Genn, he saw that the other king felt likewise. "This area is too crowded for hunting, Archdruid," the lord of Stormwind finally remarked. "And I've lost my taste for it, anyway." "Good," interjected Genn with a hint of disdain. "You'd probably end up blundering into us over and over as you go stomping through the forest, scaring off all the game. . . ." "There'll never be a day when I can't outhunt you or any of your dogs, Greymane," Varian retorted, advancing on Genn. "Ha!" The other king also advanced. "One of our younglings could catch a buck faster than you! As for me, I could take down a dozen before you managed to nick even one with those puny little bolts!" "Always big with the boasts, but never able to follow through with them-" "If I might intercede." Malfurion came between the two monarchs. "There is little point in such words unless you have the wherewithal to prove your own case." "That's always been the trouble with Greymane-" "Spoken like the self-righteous-" A thunderclap echoed through the vicinity. Ears flattening, the other worgen were cowed. Seemingly oblivious to his own display of power, the archdruid went on, "As I said, there is little point in braying at one another without being able to justify those words. Perhaps it is time to show what, if any, strength lies behind them." "What're you talking about?" Varian snapped. Genn nodded toward his rival, indicating the question was foremost on his mind as well. "You could both go your separate ways and continue this endless argument . . . or you could put some conclusion to your disagreements by seeing who does have the better skill." "You think to throw us together," Genn snarled, "and make us see each other in a different light! Ha! I know this one well enough-too well, after his damning words. . . ." "Damning in their truth," Varian retorted. "But I'll agree with Genn on your intentions, Archdruid . . . and also agree that it won't work." "Then, the two of you have nothing to fear." "It has nothing to do with fear," the Gilnean king grumbled. "Damnation!
Even if I deigned to hunt with this one around, he'd be stumbling over everything. . . ." Without warning, Genn transformed again. "Now forgive me, Malfurion, but we've lost enough time. We don't hunt for sport. We hunt." Genn darted into the brush. The other worgen turned and followed without a sound. "Fool Gilneans," Varian muttered, more to himself than to the archdruid. "My apologies for any offense I have caused," Malfurion respectfully said. Varian paid him no mind. "Give him furs, claws, even wings, Greymane's no hunter. Still all bluster, even after all the ruin he's caused himself and his kingdom. . . ." The archdruid gestured in a direction leading away from the worgen. "If you still want to hunt, you will find good game that way, Varian." The king continued to glare at where his rival had last been visible. "Varian?" Without a word, the king darted after the worgen.
18
THE CHASE
The high priestess exhaled sharply as the last of the Alliance representatives departed. She had spent every moment discussing Ashenvale's needs with the others and had at last managed to gain as much as she had hoped from them. In return, Tyrande had promised what she could of increasing Darnassus's support for various requirements of the allies' homelands. She had also worked to manipulate various deals between the different factions, achieving more in a few desperate hours than in months of negotiation. But will it be enough to save Ashenvale? she wondered as she paused to drink some water. One of her attendants entered. "General Shandris seeks an audience." The fact that Shandris had not simply walked in meant that she understood how hard the high priestess had been working on matters. The general was obviously concerned that her adopted mother might not be up to dealing with one more situation. She had underestimated Tyrande. "Send her in, of course." Shandris bowed her head as she entered. "Forgive me if this is a bad time-" "This is an appropriate time. You come with a status report?" "Yes. I think that we can get a fleet off by tomorrow midday. Our swiftresponse force makes that possible." "A force you put together for just such an occasion," Tyrande said with pride. Months prior to the Cataclysm, Shandris had proposed the prepared and prearranged force in view of elements of the Horde already battling with the night elves in Warsong Gulch. Six ships capable of carrying a full contingent of Sentinels, mounts, and supplies were put on constant call, with everything
cycled on a monthly basis to keep all fresh and ready. And now they were needed. "I but followed your lead," Shandris pointed out. "You mentioned previously that, after past events, we needed to be ready rather than reactive." "What about additional strength?" the high priestess asked, not wishing to take any credit for what she fully believed was Shandris's accomplishment. "Four more ships can sail within a week." "That is good news. I hope I have some for you. I have been able to secure assistance from the rest of the Alliance in one form or another. Most will offer military might; others supplies." Shandris smiled savagely. "The Horde will rue their ambition." "Perhaps . . ." "Something you know? A vision from Elune?" The high priestess shook her head. "No. No more visions. Merely a . . . feeling . . . on my part." "And not a good one. What is it?" "The Horde knows full well that we can muster strong reinforcements. They must be following a strategy unlike any previous." Shandris was not impressed. "Whatever they have in mind, I will be ready for it." Tyrande put a motherly hand on Shandris's shoulder. "You know my faith in you is absolute. But I have come to a decision. I will be joining you. I will be leading this expedition." The other night elf did not show any disappointment, only understanding. "You also had to make promises to some of our allies, promises that require you to go to Ashenvale to see them through." "Your 'eyes' are as good as ever. I only agreed to most of that a little bit ago." "It makes sense, especially if we need to keep them from arguing among themselves." Shandris held up a parchment that she had brought with her. "As I thought anyway that it would be the case, I have got all you need jotted down here. Might be good if we go over it." The high priestess smiled proudly. "Thank you, Shandris." "Thank me if we survive this." The younger night elf moved to the table and spread the parchment open. It proved much larger than it had first appeared, and there was hardly an empty space upon it. Shandris had made the most use
of the parchment, and with necessity. The reinforcing of Ashenvale required great consideration . . . and all of it quickly. And as Tyrande bent over the parchment and started to listen to her adopted daughter, she prayed to the Mother Moon that there would be time enough.
Varian caught wind of the worgen long before he saw the first. He knew that they could not smell his scent yet, for the wind blew toward him. The king also knew that they did not hear him, either, despite their acute senses. The curse might have given the Gilneans heightened senses, but they had not had the years to hone them as he had. They were still basically who they had been, while he had a lifetime of experience.
Those who accompanied Genn included other surviving members of the nobility, male and female. However, in addition, favored officers and Genn's own personal staff and guards would also be included in the "royal" hunt. Aside from Genn, the guards would be the ones that Varian would have to watch out for most. Although the Gilnean monarch was their first priority, in what was considered a safe land the soldiers would also probably have some leeway in pursuing the prey. That meant that Varian would actually be competing against several rivals . . . which suited him just fine. Varian had only one real reason for following. Malfurion's plot had had the opposite effect. Varian had decided to take the archdruid's suggestion and use it to embarrass Genn in front of his own people. The Gilneans would see that their vaunted leader was still a failure who would only bring them to further ruin. The idea that, by shaming Genn, Varian wanted to assuage his own sense of failure had crept into the lord of Stormwind's mind, but he had quickly and soundly buried that thought deep. All that mattered was putting the king of Gilneas in his place. A sleek form darted among the trees to his left. One of the younger worgen. Varian used the momentary observation to judge the creatures. The worgen moved more fluidly than he had first estimated, but the king saw flaws of which he could take advantage. The worgen glanced back at him. Initial surprise gave way to a reaction Varian found odd. The long ears of the other hunter straightened and Varian had the sense that not only was the worgen studying him, he was also seeing
something that was not readily apparent to the king. The worgen briefly ducked his head low as he ran, a sign that Varian had recognized among Genn's followers as one of respect for a pack member of higher status. The young worgen vanished among the trees, but not because he outpaced the lord of Stormwind. Varian ran as quickly and with as much litheness as his momentary companion. He bared his teeth as he imagined the nearby pack pursuing its prey, and increased his pace in order to better his chances of joining the chase before it was too late. He knew that the pack would not hunt too far apart from one another. Their lupine tendencies would make the worgen follow certain traits that Varian understood very well. Genn Greymane would rue his audacity, the younger monarch decided with much satisfaction. Better if he had stayed in hiding, something he's good at. The brush ahead shook. Varian immediately froze. A doe rushed past him. She was small, barely adult. Varian could smell her surprise and fear. He almost fired, then held off. He had no time for his own hunt, no matter how much the urge to give chase swelled within him. What Varian wanted was to follow Genn's prey and show that he could take it even when his rival knew that he was there. Varian slipped behind a tree just as another worgen burst through in pursuit of the doe. The king recognized the worgen's markings: Eadrik. Genn's servant moved with more assurance than the other male Varian had seen, not a surprise. Genn would have the best around him, as any monarch would. Eadrik paused. The worgen sniffed the air. Varian watched as the other hunter turned his direction. A slight movement in the opposite direction caught Eadrik's attention. The doe, acting only on her instincts and unable to meld those with common sense, had chosen an inopportune time to begin running again. The worgen lunged after her. Varian waited for a moment, then stepped from the tree. If Eadrik was here, the lord of Stormwind considered, then his master could not be far. The bow once again ready, Varian moved in the direction from which Eadrik had come. The worgen hunted as a pack to a point. Being also men, those like Genn would seek their individual kills. Varian retraced Eadrik's path, moving through the brush as readily as the worgen. His eyes constantly surveyed the vicinity and his ears and nose sought
signs of his prey. And at last he saw a worgen who could only be the Gilnean king. Genn flung himself after a massive boar with tusks so sharp and strong that, if the animal turned to face the worgen, Genn would truly risk death. At the moment, though, the boar thought only of flight. Genn, however, was fast gaining. He ran sometimes on only his legs, but other times used his hands too. With a litheness that Varian had not even seen from the much younger Eadrik, the veteran ruler closed on the boar. Having measured the situation, Varian entered the fray. Although without the "benefit" of the curse, he moved with all the skill and pace of one who had survived more critical struggles than surely all the worgen combined. Yet, it was more than merely the reflexes of a former gladiator that served Varian now. Another force guided him, drove him in among the worgen as if he were one of their own and not simply a man. Others in the past had called him Lo'Gosh . . . and, at that moment, that name was more true of him than the one with which he had been born. Growls greeted him as he moved out into the open. Two raven-black worgen-one a female with a narrower snout-leapt toward him from the trees beyond Genn. Their appearance did not surprise Varian. He had already marked them as guards. Ahead, Genn's ears pricked up as he heard the warning growls. He glanced to his side and saw Varian with the bow. Varian purposely ignored his rival, instead following the boar's trail. Out of the corner of his eye, he noted Genn's sudden understanding of just what the lord of Stormwind intended. With a challenging growl, Genn pulled up. Only then did Varian also stop. "So . . . ," snarled the worgen. "You've come to prove yourself my better after all?" "I'll always be your better, Genn." "Rubbish! You can only imagine the powers that the curse has given us, powers beyond mere humans, powers-" "Powers to outbrag anything," interjected Varian. "At least, that's all I've seen thus far!" The other two worgen neared. Genn angrily waved them off. "Don't know why I ever sought your approval for our people! If the rest of the Alliance
chooses to follow you down your doomed path, then so be it!" Varian ignored the insults. "My quarry's running hard. You can stay and blather all day if you like, but I'm moving on. I've a meal to catch." "Your quarry? You jest!" Genn sniffed at his opponent. "You think you can take him from me? Listen to me, Varian Wrynn! The curse more than heightened our senses. We see things that no normal human can. Some call you Lo'Gosh, though that they use a Taur-ahe title for you I find ironic. Still, it is but another name for Goldrinn, as we have come to know our patron spirit since our transformation. I saw the aura of that spirit around you the first moment you arrived at the banquet, and even though you gave every indication of crushing our hopes then, I still held out for our chances because I could see his touch upon you as if it were your own skin. . . ." Although he showed no sign of it, Varian was briefly unnerved by Genn's revelation. He had gratefully accepted the name when given to him, but had always thought it just an honor. Now Genn claimed that the wolf spirit's essence or something touched Varian. Ignorant of the effect of his words, the king of Gilneas went on, "But even if Goldrinn has blessed you, you're still Varian Wrynn . . . and that's why you stand as much a chance of taking my prey as you do lifting the Greymane Wall with your bare hands. . . ." And with that, Genn Greymane rushed off after the boar. Varian followed without hesitation. He saw that Genn had some advantage in speed, but if the king of Gilneas indeed thought his rival less adept at the hunt than the worgen, it was because he had not seen Varian in pursuit of prey. Instincts that no ordinary man possessed overtook the lord of Stormwind again. He smelled not only the scents of the worgen but, even through those many smells, that of the boar. Sharp hearing differentiated between the sleek, subtle sounds of the worgen moving through the forest and the more rushed charge of the huge animal they chased. Varian eyed the landscape before him, instantly understanding the lay of it. He altered his path from that of his rival and rushed toward the south, then turned again. As he had estimated, the land rose up against Genn, slowing him a few precious seconds. Barely breathing hard, Varian scurried down the other side. He knew from so many past hunts that the boar would be in need of a pause, and he had a very good notion of roughly where.
An exhilaration filled Varian as he pursued the hunt, an exhilaration that had nothing to do with besting Genn. He felt more alive than he had in months. The pain of Anduin's abrupt departure still remained, but the constant exertion, the need to keep his attention focused so hard on the quarry, enabled Varian to better tolerate the terrible loss. He spotted a shape far ahead that was no worgen. The huge boar stood frozen, either hoping that its stillness would keep it hidden from the hunters, or simply finding itself unable to choose what to do next. The boar suddenly moved. Varian swore under his breath. The boar was racing up toward where Genn would likely appear. Somehow, Varian had spooked the creature even from so far away. It was not typical of his hunts, and to the younger king, now was the worst possible time for him to make such a mistake. But Varian did not give in to defeat. He still had the chance to outwit his rival. More important, the bow gave him an advantage in distance, assuming that he utilized his skill to its utmost. Varian rushed up behind the boar. Twice he almost had his shot. The second time, the boar turned in a direction that the veteran hunter had not expected. It forced the animal to scramble over unsteady ground, providing both pursuers a better chance of catching up. Sure enough, a worgen materialized a moment later . . . but not on the path from which Varian expected Genn. It was one of the younger ones, a dark brown male with the tip of one ear missing. Evidently his own hunt had led him back this direction and now he stalked after prey that he did not know had been chosen by his master . . . and Varian. The boar twisted as it struggled up a hill. The young worgen closed on the animal. Of Genn there was yet no sign, but Varian had to assume that he would be there at any moment. He aimed. A good shot-a very good shot-would down the boar before the young worgen could catch it. At that moment the boar turned on the worgen. Caught by surprise, the Gilnean did not move out of the way in time. The gargantuan boar used its tusks and snout to toss its one pursuer to the side. The worgen crashed against a tree, stunned by the collision. The animal's decision gave Varian the shot he desired. He aimed . . . and
then held back. The boar chose then to turn and continue its flight. "And this is how you hunt?" mocked Genn's voice. Varian turned to find the other king racing up to him. Behind Genn came several others, including Eadrik. The gathered worgen sniffed the air in the direction of the fleeing boar. "Sometimes you need to let the prey run," Varian replied. "That makes no sense!" The lord of Stormwind had no interest in explanations. "Shall we continue?" Before Genn could answer, Varian ran again. He heard a growl from his rival, then the soft sound of the pack following. Varian was not concerned that the other worgen had joined in. He knew that they would leave the hunt to their lord. This was still a contest between the two rulers. Varian picked up the boar's trail. He admired the beast's stamina and strength. In some fashion, he related to its struggle. Varian intended to honor his quarry and make certain that the carcass would not go to waste. That would be a true insult to an admirable adversary. The boar rushed toward thick brush that possibly promised escape. Certainly it would be harder for either Varian or Genn to chase the animal into it without being slowed. The boar was better designed to push through. Then from another direction came a new worgen. Belatedly, Varian recognized him as the young one with the missing ear tip. The boar let out an unsettling snort. It fought to stop in its tracks. Caught by surprise, the young worgen landed in front of rather than atop his intended prey. The boar charged back the way it had come, seemingly ignorant of the fact that it raced toward more of its pursuers. Another startled worgen leapt aside just as sharp tusks would have gored his leg. The light brown hunter landed on all fours and readied himself for another lunge. Out of the thick brush behind him burst a bear. The huge black beast stood on its hind legs and roared, revealing a maw wide enough to envelope a man's head and sharp, yellowed teeth more than capable of ripping that head free. The bear loomed over the startled worgen, its long, thick claws more than a match for those of the Gilnean. The wind was the reason that no one had picked up the other predator's scent. It had been blowing toward the bear, which, perhaps because of its
tremendous size, had not been deterred by the worgen's presence. For the young, impetuous Gilnean, that meant that the hunter had now become the prey. Instinct commanded Varian, who immediately fired. However, the bear turned as he did and the arrow struck the shoulder. The wound more outraged the ursine beast than slowed it. It continued to focus on the nearest enemy. The young worgen moved too slowly to dodge the heavy paw. The blow sent the Gilnean tumbling, although unfortunately not far enough to keep him safe from the bear. Another arrow already nocked, Varian fired. The second shot also struck, this time in the upper chest. However, the bear's thick hide and strong muscle were enough to keep the creature from being badly wounded. As the second bolt hit, another worgen suddenly leapt into the struggle. He threw himself in front of the fallen one, then howled a challenge to the bear. The looming beast roared back at the worgen. Huge teeth snapped at the brave Gilnean. Despite the threat, Genn Greymane stood his ground. Behind him, two others seized the stunned hunter and dragged him off. This seemed to further infuriate the wounded bear, which reached for the lone defender with both huge paws. The worgen jumped above the paws, either of which would have landed a killing blow. Using the bear's own foreleg as a boost, the lupine hunter dove for his adversary's thick throat. Claws raked at the area just below the bear's jaw. Blood splattered the worgen. The bear roared in pain now. Yet, that pain also fueled its incredible strength. One foreleg caught the worgen as he sought to leap back. The bear fell upon its attacker. Varian had come to a decision, albeit one most men would call mad. Alone against the bear, he would have eventually downed the beast with a shot to the throat or the eye. However, the confrontation with the worgen had made his shots more difficult since he did not want to cause any harm to them. Therefore, the bow was of no use. Letting the bow simply drop free, the lord of Stormwind drew his knife and, with a howl worthy of a worgen, threw himself forward. Bloodlust drowning
out attention to anything else, the bear saw only Genn, just as Varian had hoped. The human landed atop the hulking animal. Without hesitation, Varian jammed the knife into the muscular flesh. The struggle caused his aim to be off. Instead of the neck, he caught the shoulder blade. The tip of the knife snapped off, leaving an angled edge. Worse for him, he had now become the center of the ursine behemoth's attention. The bear straightened, nearly dislodging Varian. The huge beast twisted, trying to free itself of the annoyance clinging to its back. It was all Varian could do to hold on. Even the rippling of the bear's muscles shook him like an earthquake. The king also gripped the broken knife, the end of which still had some use as a weapon-if Varian did not fall. A snarl that was not the bear's filled Varian's ears. Genn Greymane again jumped up, his claws seeking the furious animal's throat. As the bear sought to shake both of them off, the two monarchs' eyes met and Varian realized that Greymane was trying to distract the beast enough for the lord of Stormwind to strike again. The thick forelegs wrapped around Genn. Roaring, the bear sought to bite the worgen's face off. Varian saw his chance. The broken edge forced him to use every bit of his strength to shove the knife into the bear's neck. Many men would have failed to drive the weapon deep enough, but not only did Varian have the might, he also had the knowledge-from too many gladiatorial bouts-of just where the softest part of the neck was. The bear's jaws were inches away from closing on Genn's face. Varian drove the knife deep, nearly shoving it in to the hilt. The bear roared louder than ever, but this time there was a strained note to it. Agony did what the beast could not accomplish before: both rulers were tossed off as if nothing. The stricken animal turned around. Varian, sprawled on the ground, stared up at the gigantic creature. The bear could still kill him. But instead, the animal tried to reach with its paws for the knife. Claws that could shred a man could not even properly grasp the hilt. The bear slapped at the source of its pain several times, its breathing getting more ragged by the
moment. Exhaustion and blood loss sent the bear crashing down on all fours. It rocked back and forth, still trying to twist its head around enough to bite out the knife. A figure moved in from the other side. Varian heard the familiar sound of tearing flesh. The bear let out a moan and fell on its left side, its throat now torn out. A worgen stood above the dead animal, blood and bits of meat still dangling from the end of his claws. The worgen looked at Varian. Varian nodded to Genn. The other king had done the correct thing. Neither of them bore any malice toward the bear. The creature had only been following its instincts and it had been its misfortune to come across the hunters. That it could have easily killed not only the two of them but also the unfortunate young worgen was simply part of the risk when hunting. Genn offered a gore-soaked hand to Varian. Varian had heard long ago that the king of Gilneas had been raised not to accept the hand of anyone, to always stand on his own, and at first the lord of Stormwind thought to decline the offer. Then he remembered all his counterpart had promised and was doing to rejoin the Alliance. Varian took the hand. Genn helped him up . . . and then the two men held their grips a moment longer, two hunters acknowledging one another's skills. Turning to the bear, Varian studied his counterpart's strike. "A quick killing blow," he complimented Genn. "I simply finished your work," the Gilnean ruler returned. "The kill is yours. The hunt is yours." Varian shook his head. "Hardly. I was hunting a boar." "A man who hunts a rabbit and brings down a deer is applauded. A man who hunts a boar and brings down a bear should be acclaimed." And with that, Genn looked to the sky and unleashed a powerful howl, a howl that honored both the kill and the one who made it. His call was taken up by the other worgen, all saluting the skills of the king of Stormwind. Genn finally finished, the howls of his followers ending with his. He faced his counterpart again. Only . . . Varian was no longer there.
19
SILVERWING
Silverwing Outpost had had no news in two days from the nearest other outposts, and that worried Su'ura Swiftarrow. She had come from Silverwing Grove at the behest of the outpost's commander, only to find that the other officer had been slain in an ambush shortly before Su'ura's arrival. The ambush had also taken out the second-in-command. Su'ura had not intended to stay, but the only other Sentinel officer was too inexperienced. She had dispatched two hippogryph riders, one to the next nearest outpost and the other to Commander Haldrissa. From one of the two there should have been some word. Either that, or the riders should have returned with warning of some catastrophe. But the riders had not returned and Su'ura suspected that they would not. Silverwing Outpost was on its own in the battle against the Horde. She strode along the edge of the outpost, eyeing the mist that was fast rising. It could not be blamed on Fallen Sky Lake to the south, not when it was coming from Horde-held lands. A low rumble of warning rose up from behind her. She did not show any surprise, aware of what kept pace with her. "Easy," Su'ura said to the huge black nightsaber with her. The beast wore golden brown armor with purple gems over its head and sides. The night elf herself was also fully armored, as were all those on duty, though her shoulder areas were more decorated with fine gold bands over the silver. Those who thought the armor more ornamental than useful had discovered, if they were orcs or other foes, that it protected her quite well while she was gutting them. The hoot of an owl seized her attention as the growl of the night-saber had
not. The outpost commander looked up to the roof of the main structure, where a soot-colored owl perched. The bird peered into the forest ahead, then abruptly abandoned its position. It descended to a waiting Su'ura, who stretched out her arm so that it had a place to alight. "What is it, Hutihu?" she asked grimly. "Where?" In response, the owl hooted once, then swiveled its head slightly toward a particular part of the forest. Su'ura followed its gaze expectantly. The sentries at the outpost's edge stiffened as a figure slipped out of the brush. They only calmed when it was clear it was one of their own . . . so to speak. The figure who returned to Silverwing belonged to a group that was not exactly favored by most Sentinels, but it had its uses, and in Su'ura's eyes some members had more than proven their loyalty. In fact, the one approaching now was so trusted by Su'ura that she had risen up to a level of command, now serving as supply officer. Of course, her role as a scout-for lack of a better word-along with related unofficial duties, was still the most important aspect of her use. "Illiyana Moonblaze," Su'ura solemnly greeted her. "You are back sooner than I expected . . . and hoped." The other night elf was a distinct contrast to Su'ura, not to mention most of the others there. It was not just that she wore a dark corseted outfit that reminded Su'ura more of a human buccaneer, but that Illiyana radiated a presence in some manner akin to that of a wild pirate. As tradition went, those of Illiyana's "calling" were not respected much more than pirates even though they had been a part of night elf life for years, but the changing times had more and more found places for such as her among the trusted fighters of the Alliance. Illiyana sheathed a pair of longswords she utilized in place of a glaive. With a wry smile, she asked, "You did not miss me?" "Enough jesting. What did you see?" "More to the point, what did I not see? And what did I hear?" The commander looked at her with some exasperation. Hutihu made a sound that echoed her annoyance. The wry grin faded a bit. "All right. First, it is so thick out there, you cannot see more than a few feet in front. We do not go charging into it, it should be to
our advantage." "So we stand our ground." "Unfortunately, it is moving toward us." Su'ura had already thought so, but hearing that fact verified still struck her now. "You could have said that right away. How fast?" "Fast enough that it is good you have got everyone in position already." As bad as that, the commander thought. "You said you heard something?" "Buzzing. Like a great mass of wasps. There is another thing: the more you go into the mist, the more it stinks of oil, as if someone lit a bunch of lamps and left them burning." Su'ura knew what that, combined with the buzzing, meant. "Goblins. There are goblins out there." Illiyana appeared unimpressed. "The night we cannot handle a bunch of goblins is the night Ashenvale should fall." "Be careful what you say," snapped the commander, although she was not overly concerned about the goblins, either. What much more bothered her was what would be marching with them. She peered upward at the tall trees ahead. The mist was not quite thick enough to obscure the tops. Su'ura had sent scouts high above to see if they could spot anything, but the forest below had been as if under a thick blanket through which the crowns popped like islands. "Where are the others?" Illiyana suddenly asked her. It was a question for which Su'ura had been waiting but had not wanted to answer. "You are the only one who returned." For once, Illiyana looked a little unsettled. "'The only one'?" There had been three others who had fanned out into the mist with Illiyana. Based on their destinations, Su'ura had expected them back earlier. The fact that they had not returned yet meant that they were not returning at all. It also meant that the enemy was even closer than originally anticipated. "You encountered no one, Illiyana?" "I found some tracks that went deeper into the eastern mist, but they looked conspicuously visible and so I chose not to follow them." "Very likely a wise thing." Illiyana was a seasoned tracker, more so than even the other three. They had probably decided to follow similar trails . . . just as the Horde's own commanders had intended.
"Someone has gone through a lot of trouble," Su'ura muttered, stroking Hutihu's feathers. The owl hooted agreement. "Should I go and look for them?" "No, I think that would be-" She heard a slight buzzing from the forest. Illiyana, Hutihu, and the nightsaber all reacted with the same tensing of their bodies. "That is what I heard," Illiyana said. "What is it?" The dark-clad night elf sniffed the air. "Whatever it is, that oily stench comes with it." Everyone could smell the odor now. The nightsaber crouched, its nostrils flaring in disgust. "Can goblins build nothing that does not stink?" the commander finally muttered. "Or that does not have evil purpose?" "Fortunately, half the time, those contraptions either do not work or explode." "And the other half of the time, they wreak havoc on us." Illiyana could not argue with her there. Su'ura sent Hutihu to the trees, then stepped forward. "Archers to the ready! Lancers should mount! First lines form!" In response to the last, Sentinels on foot took up positions just in front of the archers. Armed with glaives, they went down on one knee. Given the word, they would throw the deadly weapons simultaneously, cutting a deadly swath across anything in the glaives' path. Other Sentinels, some of them arming powerful ballistae called glaive throwers, stood ready behind the archers. In addition to the glaive on their gauntlets, several warriors also wore a second one slung on their backs. They were there to reinforce the front lines as needed. A pack of armored nightsabers now stood awaiting the cue from their riders, whose senior officer watched Su'ura for the signal. Faces grim beneath their heavy helmets, the riders kept their long lances pointed skyward. The buzzing grew stronger, more piercing. It was now accompanied by a grinding sound, one that Su'ura thought she now recognized. It said something for the stress of the situation that she had not made the connection earlier. After
all, the goblins had been known to be cutting wood nearby. . . . Then silence reigned again. The Sentinels stood uncertain. Officers looked to Su'ura, who watched and listened for the slightest hint of what was happening. An odd, unsettling groan echoed through the forest. The night elves looked at one another, even Illiyana clearly perplexed concerning the source of the long, mournful sound. To Su'ura, it was almost as if the forest itself were groaning, for it seemed to come from several places at once. The commander swallowed. She suddenly realized what that groan meant. Looking to the eastern sky, she tried to see through the offending mist . . . some smokescreen created by the insidious devices of the goblins. Su'ura sought for one particular sight-and then spotted it in more than one place. It was so unbelievable that she could not help but stare at it for a moment, even despite the disaster it presaged. "The trees . . . they are moving. . . ." "Hmm?" Illiyana looked up in the hopes of trying to make sense of the other night elf's odd words. Through the mist, gargantuan stalks plunged toward the outpost, stalks topped by great crowns. "Retreat!" Su'ura cried. "Watch out-" Other Sentinels finally registered what was happening. Archers, lancers, foot soldiers . . . seasoned warriors everywhere now broke off and tried their best to rush as quickly to the rear as they were able. The groan became deafening. The first of the gigantic trees fell upon Silverwing. Even as she fought to keep some semblance of organization in the outpost, Su'ura could not help but bitterly admire the tactic. The Horde had clearly scouted the area thoroughly, picking and choosing the right trees for their assault. They had chosen great leviathans whose path would be hardly impeded at all by the smaller ones nearest them. The crash of the first tree shook the ground like an earthquake. It also crushed part of the main structure of the outpost and two nightsabers and their unfortunate riders. Worse, the gargantuan trunk did not stay where it landed but rather rolled south. In the process, it swept over three other Sentinels, crushing them like insects. Even as the first tree did its foul work, a second hit. Another terrible
convulsion rocked the night elves. Sentinels were thrown about. Nightsabers howled like newborn cubs as they sought escape that was not there. A third tree came crashing. Somewhat to their fortune, the crown landed in that of the main tree in Silverwing, preventing the severed trunk from doing as much damage. The hapless defenders were still bombarded by falling foliage and cracked branches as big as one of their feline mounts. Su'ura bent to help a stunned Sentinel. She had no idea where Illiyana had gone and could not blame the other night elf if she had fled. They could not fight trees. How did one fend off such a weapon? Another incredible thud rocked Silverwing. The crash of timber warned that more of the outpost had been ruined. Worse, the shrieks of the badly injured multiplied. She had counted four trees toppling toward the outpost, and four had fallen. Su'ura prayed that she had not miscounted, though she was hard-pressed to imagine where the Horde could have found a fifth to add to the onslaught. They had needed the gaps in the forest to ensure that their makeshift hammers would strike the target precisely. Dust and wreckage from the crowns filled the air. Amidst it, Su'ura smelled a great increase in the oily stench created by the goblins. She also heard heavy thumps, as if some giant lumbered through the forest just beyond Silverwing. "Re-form lines!" she shouted, wondering if anyone would not only hear but also bother to obey. "They are attacking!" The thumping grew louder, accompanied by loud buzzing. The commander turned to the forest. Two-legged goblin mechanisms entered Silverwing. They moved like drunk night elves, and one arm of each ended in a toothed, spinning blade. Barely had the first of the shredders entered than a flight of arrows assailed them. Two goblins fell dead. One of the driverless machines spun around and crashed into a third. Su'ura looked to see that some of the Sentinels had rallied to her cry. Behind the single row of archers, foot soldiers and lancers also attempted to regroup. The drivers of the other shredders raised the second arm to shield themselves. Su'ura immediately took advantage of their tactical mistake. "Huntresses! Charge!" She had no idea how many there were, but the pack that coursed past her
more than met her expectations. Her heart grew lighter. The Horde thought that they had dealt Silverwing a mortal blow, but they had obviously forgotten with whom they were dealing. The contingent here had learned to adapt at a moment's notice. More than a dozen heavily muscled cats raced at the shredders. The huntresses readied their shields and lowered their lances, the points straight ahead. The pack charged into the shredders. Distracted by the flight of arrows, most of the goblins saw the charge too late. A couple managed to get their whirling blades up. A nightsaber howled as a blade cut into its jaw. But overall, the charge held. The lances, aimed with precision, pierced the shredders at the underarm-where they were most vulnerable-or simply managed to tip them backward. Loud crashes accompanied the shredders' falls. As per their training, the huntresses immediately retreated. However, as they did, a flight of arrows launched from the east struck. Four nightsabers immediately dropped, followed by that many more within the first few breaths. Their shields being of less effect when held behind them, the huntresses suffered even more. In seconds, the pack and their riders were decimated. A battle horn blew. A lusty roar resounded from the forest. Orcs flowed through the woods into Silverwing. The first line fell nearly to a warrior, shot down by the expert aim of the outpost's remaining archers. Unfortunately, the orcs kept coming and now they were accompanied by arrows flying overhead. Those arrows sought out the night elf archers, slaying several and shattering the line. Drawing her glaive, Su'ura leapt atop her mount. She shouted toward the remaining lancers, who rallied to her. "Drive them back!" Su'ura ordered. "Give the archers and the others time to regroup again!" With her in the lead, the riders turned again on the oncoming orcs. Su'ura threw the glaive at the first of the attackers and watched with grim satisfaction as the flying blades cut through the chest of the tusked warrior. Blood spilling from the red crevice, the orc tumbled forward, inadvertently tripping two of those directly behind him. Catching the glaive, Su'ura took advantage of the
confusion by striking down one of the pair before they could untangle themselves. The orc line faltered. The riders pushed them back. A new flight of arrows assailed the orcs. It was accompanied by a number of spinning glaives that further annihilated their front ranks. Su'ura let out a triumphant yell. The Horde was again learning the folly of attacking Silverwing. Despite the astounding ploy by its commander, the defenders would gain the day- Another horn blew. The orc lines dropped. A fresh flight of arrows concentrated on the riders. Su'ura, at point, saw some of the Horde's archers just as they were firing, and shouted a warning. She planted herself against the nightsaber's neck and prayed the others did the same. However, the many cries she heard in her wake did not give her much hope. Worse, her mount stumbled, then collapsed. In the process, the animal threw Su'ura. The night elf fell among the dead, an orc's gaping face barely an inch from hers. She tried to rise, but something held her leg down. Su'ura twisted around and saw that the nightsaber, more than a dozen heavy bolts piercing its body, had fallen on the limb, trapping it. The unfortunate cat was already dead, which meant that she could not even get the animal to move. She managed to seize an axe from the dead orc. With the carnage going on around her, she was momentarily forgotten. Doubtful that it would remain that way long, the night elf tried to use the axe head to prop up the carcass enough to slip her leg free. A nerve-shaking wail rose over the vicinity, causing her to lose her grip on the axe. Despite her predicament, she had to see the cause. Two Sentinels blocked her view, but not for very long. Although expertly wielding their glaives for hand-to-hand combat, first one, then the other, fell. One did so minus her head; the other with his torso cut all the way down the middle. The doom of each was accompanied by the same awful wail. And as the night elves fell, they revealed the lone foe who had so easily dealt with them. The brown-skinned orc grinned as he looked for another enemy to smite. In his hands he gripped a dreadful axe that had an intricate series of
grooves in the head. Su'ura had never seen him before, but knew instantly from the tales that she stared at Garrosh Hellscream himself. As if sensing her, his baleful gaze turned in her direction. The Sentinel seized the axe again and shoved the weapon's head toward the corpse of her mount. Twisting the handle, she used the head to push up the nightsaber just enough to finally pull her leg free. "Good," declared an ominous, deep voice. "I want a fair battle." She stared up at the warchief, who made no move yet. Su'ura realized that he was waiting for her to stand. Once she did that, he would move in to finish her. While the night elf did not fear him, she knew from the way her body ached that she was injured inside. More important, this was Garrosh Hellscream, whose prowess in combat had already become legendary. Another nightsaber suddenly came between them. Unafraid, the orc turned to face this new foe. The cat swatted at Garrosh but did not close with the hulking warrior. "Run!" called the rider. Only then did Su'ura realize that it was Illiyana. But her would-be rescuer had underestimated Garrosh Hellscream. The orc lunged under the nightsaber's claws. He took the axe and jammed it upward, beneath the great cat's jaw. Illiyana's mount yowled and pulled back sharply. Blood seeping from the wound above its throat, the animal writhed in agony. The scout was tossed toward the corpse of the other cat. Illiyana struck the heavy body hard, then rolled over. Su'ura had not waited all this time. She had risen to a crouching position, trying to determine not where to flee but how to help Illiyana battle Garrosh. Now she instead had to rescue her rescuer. Although badly wounded by the warchief's daring attack, the trained nightsaber returned to the struggle. Su'ura used the animal's bravery to help Illiyana up. "That . . . did not work . . . as I planned," the other night elf gasped. "How are you?" Illiyana grimaced. "I think my left arm is either broken or perhaps just pulled." "Then we had better hurry away from here."
"I can fight-" "No argument! We are behind the line now! We have got to get back to the rest!" The horrific wail of Garrosh's axe cut through the air again. It was followed by an angry and pained roar from the nightsaber. Su'ura did not look back. She regretted the cat's sacrifice but had no choice. To stay would be suicide for both fighters. Several yards to the west, she saw some of the defenders again regrouping, but farther to the east the situation grew more and more desperate. There, individual Sentinels, cut off from hope, fought against one or more foes, odds too often quickly fatal. Su'ura watched in horror as an orc lopped off the head of one of her officers. The body of the Sentinel staggered a few steps before finally collapsing. Elsewhere, severed limbs marked the dooms of other night elves. Now and then, a glaive would go spinning past, but those signs of resistance grew less and less with each passing second. Su'ura and Illiyana had managed to get within a few yards of a small party of archers when Su'ura sensed that they were not alone. With regret, she shoved Illiyana toward the other defenders, hoping that the other night elf's reflexes were still sharp enough to compensate for the sudden loss of the commander's help. Su'ura barely got her weapon up in time to prevent an older orc with an eye patch and covered in maritime tattoos from cleaving her in two with his heavy axe. He was no Garrosh, but his experience and sheer determination put her on the defensive from the first moment. "I'll make this quick," he rasped. "You wouldn't want to be around when he unleashes them, anyway. . . ." She had no idea what he was talking about and did not care. What concerned Su'ura more was that the leg that had been trapped under the dead nightsaber was now tingling. It had been injured, after all, and now that injury was causing problems with her balance. The night elf followed Garrosh's trick, suddenly lunging into her opponent when he would have expected otherwise. The startled orc backed away. Su'ura slashed with the axe, but managed only a thin red line across his arm. An arrow from behind her struck the ground between them. Another bounced off the orc's shoulder armor.
The green-skinned warrior snarled, then withdrew as two more arrows harassed him. Two Sentinels seized Su'ura and pulled her back to the archers. As they did, the commander heard the buzzing of a shredder. Some of the goblins had managed to get their foul mechanisms on their feet again and were tearing apart what the falling trees had not already destroyed. Su'ura smelled fire. The main building was ablaze, whether by the goblins or some other source, she did not know. She considered taking a chance and rushing into it to retrieve some of the valuable charts stored there, but knew that it was too late to do anything. The terrible wail echoed in her ears again. Garrosh, his weapon dripping with blood, yelled an unintelligible command to his warriors. Even the goblins moved in response, the shredders forming a line, then stopping. "They-they are within range!" Illiyana was incredulous. "Are they committing suicide?" "It does not matter! Archers, fire at will! I want every glaive flying too!" More and more of Silverwing's survivors gathered. Su'ura saw that the Sentinels still had a fairly decent line of defense. True, they looked to be outnumbered, but that would not be the first time. Yet, as the first archers readied their shots, again a horn sounded. The archers hesitated. "Do not wait!" cursed Su'ura. A monstrous roar burst from the goblin-induced mist. Something came flying out of the forest. A huge projectile. A rock several times Su'ura's height in diameter. It was followed by five more. She faced what seemed a variation of the same nightmare that had initially struck the outpost. With much the same accuracy of aim, the huge rocks fell upon Silverwing. There was no choice but to scatter. The final stand of the Silverwing Sentinels collapsed under threat of a force that they could not stop. The first huge rock struck the ground just before where the archers had stood. As with the massive trunks, the area shook as if the Cataclysm had come anew. However, the rocks-more focused missiles-raised up huge bits of dirt and stone that bombarded the night elves. A Sentinel near Illiyana dropped
dead, her skull caved in by one sharp fragment. Two archers were brought down by a rain of earth. Silverwing filled with thunder as the rest of the boulders hit. Sentinels went flying through the air. Two other boulders completely obliterated the glaive throwers and their operators. Nightsabers, driven wild by the catastrophe, ignored their riders' orders. The Horde wasted no time in taking advantage. Garrosh let out a cry of victory, waved the wailing axe, and led the charge himself. A few Sentinels, bowled over by the latest barrage, struggled to rise quick enough to at least put up a defense against the oncoming enemy. They gave a good accounting for themselves, managing to bring more than a few orcs down with their glaives and swords, but none survived long against such overwhelming odds. Illiyana was the first to state the terribly obvious. "We cannot stay any longer! We must abandon our position!" Although she wanted to deny what her companion said, Su'ura could not. The Sentinels' numbers were fast dwindling. Several of those still alive were wounded, and against the growing ranks of orcs entering the battle, it would have been murder to order them to stay. "Fall back!" Su'ura called. "We make our way beyond the river to Commander Haldrissa!" Clearly reluctant, the Sentinels nevertheless obeyed. They gathered those more injured and, under the protective cover of the healthiest archers and warriors, did what none would have ever thought could happen. They abandoned Silverwing Outpost. The orcs gave chase. To Su'ura's relief, there were no orcs mounted on wolves among them. Furthermore, the few nightsabers still manageable helped carry the wounded Sentinels while the rest kept pace as best as possible. Night elves were better built for speed, and finally the pursuers fell behind. Even then, though, Silverwing's remnants pushed on as hard as they could. The others had to be warned. Su'ura knew that something was not quite right about their escape, but was too exhausted and too busy trying to keep the rest of the survivors together to consider the matter. Her injuries were taking their toll and only with Illiyana's aid could she keep moving. Su'ura glanced at her companion and saw that the other night elf also seemed troubled. While certainly not easy, the defenders'
flight should have been much, much harder. However, there was nothing they could do but keep moving and hope that they had, indeed, managed to evade their pursuers. The survivors had to reach Commander Haldrissa. She peered over her shoulder. Smoke rose from the outpost. The goblins' mist had finally faded to nothing this far west and so she had a good view of the black plumes rising over the trees. The impossible has happened! Silverwing has fallen. The dread words repeated themselves over and over in her head. Silverwing has fallen. . . . Su'ura feared that Ashenvale itself would be next.
His warriors were chafing to hunt down Silverwing's remaining defenders, but Garrosh wanted the night elves to escape. It was all part of his grand strategy.
Briln and the other officers joined him. The former mariner had proven himself worthy in combat and the warchief gave him a nod. Briln grinned. "Silverwing is ours," Garrosh declared with immense satisfaction. The others around him cheered. Warriors beyond them took up the cry. The cheer became a single word, or rather, name. Over and over, the warriors shouted out "Garrosh! Garrosh!" "The survivors'll tell 'em what happened," Briln mentioned when the cheering had finally died down. "The Alliance will have many more fighters when they come to avenge Silverwing. They'll be ready for blood." Garrosh grinned. "Good. Let them send a thousand fighters-ten thousand." He waved Gorehowl over his head, the axe keening. The other orcs looked with admiration upon the fabled weapon. "Let them send all the warriors the Alliance has." The warchief eyed the carnage he had wrought. "It will just mean more of them will die."
20
DEPARTURES
"Welcome, Shandris," Tyrande greeted as the general entered the chamber where the high priestess and the archdruid had been in grave discussion concerning the events in Ashenvale. "I understand that the readiness of the first expedition is imminent." The general bowed her head. "The Mother Moon makes my network look slow and inefficient. All is as you say. We will be able to leave shortly." Malfurion did not look pleased with this news. "I should have never agreed that you take command of the expedition, Tyrande. I am the one who will go." "No. Elune has decreed that this is my path. It pains me that we will be apart, but in the vision I saw myself there and you here, and knew it the right thing." He grimaced. "The path of the druid sounds easier and easier when I listen to things such as this." Two attendants entered the chamber from another room behind Tyrande. They carried her armor. "I would certainly beg to differ, Mal. If I never have anything to do with the Emerald Dream again, I will be very pleased about that." "All is in readiness, mistress," one of the attendants informed the high priestess. "We are about to take your belongings aboard and wondered if you would be wearing this for the journey." "No. Elune promises us a safe voyage. It is in Ashenvale where she cannot reveal what awaits." With a grunt, Shandris saluted her. "Judging by the pace of your packing, my news was even more out-of-date than I thought. I suspect it would be good for me to get my own gear aboard. We will be sailing very soon, will we not?"
The high priestess smiled. "Yes. But only if that meets with your approval." "The sooner we get to Ashenvale, the sooner we send the Horde running." With that, Shandris saluted Tyrande and Malfurion, then marched off. Tyrande's smile turned into a fearful frown. She quickly dismissed the attendants and, when finally alone with her husband, said, "I truly cannot see what is happening in Ashenvale, Mal. I do not like that . . . but I still know that I have got to be there and you need to be here. I cannot explain why." "No need. I will just grind my teeth and do as you say." Tyrande kissed the archdruid. "Thank you for understanding." "Hmmph! You know I do not." "Then thank you for pretending." With tremendous reluctance, she broke from him. "I must go." "I will not see you off. I promise." Tyrande had earlier asked him not to be there when the ships sailed. Despite her assurance that Elune knew what had to be done, it was still at least as much a struggle for Tyrande to separate from him as it was Malfurion from her. They had already lost so many centuries in the past. And now, with mortality peering over their shoulders, it was harder than ever to contemplate being in two different lands, especially considering that they did not know what danger might await Tyrande-danger in which Malfurion would be unable to intervene. "Oh! What news of the assassins?" she asked as she departed. "Maiev has a theory involving the worgen. I doubt its value, but at this point, it would not surprise me to learn anything." That caused her to stop. "The worgen?" "I will follow through on it with Maiev. As I said, it is very likely nothing, but we will see. Go now! I will keep Darnassus in one piece while you are away, even if I am not you." "Thank you." She left before either could find another excuse to delay the separation. Malfurion immediately tried to focus on something other than his wife. The murders were the most logical, not to mention urgent, choice. He had not revealed that Jarod had also indicated there was a need to speak to the worgen, but Maiev's brother wanted to do it without his sister present. While the former guard captain had not said as much, his style of investigation was quite different from his sister's. Both were very determined and known for getting the task
done. Jarod, though, preferred a less brash, more subtle approach, which was also more to Malfurion's tastes. And with all the chaos going on at the moment, whatever little calm could be maintained was more than for what the archdruid could hope.
He should have waited for Malfurion, but Jarod could not contain his impatience any longer. Nor did he think that he could keep his intentions hidden from Maiev. That was why Jarod was already on his way to the area where he knew that he would find the group of worgen whom he had previously encountered. More important, he would find that one particular worgen.
Maiev had some other avenue of investigation that she wanted to pursue and had taken Neva with her, so Jarod was able to slip away fairly easily. His sister still did not entirely think him necessary to her work, but so long as he did nothing to interfere, anything he might accidentally discover she would accept. Someday, perhaps we will understand one another better, Jarod thought as he neared the territory where he had last confronted the worgen. He sensed the faint smell that he associated with the worgen. A musky sweat. The scent was faint, but that did not mean that the worgen were not nearby. "Night elf . . ." Even closer than I thought. . . . Jarod turned to face the worgen who had spoken. He did not recognize the markings, at least not as those of the one he sought. "What do you do here, again?" the worgen growled. So this is at least one of those from before. That pleased Jarod, for it saved time in having to explain just who he was. There were enough other things that he might have to explain. "I would like to talk with one of you. The one who was in charge the last time I was here." The worgen cocked his head. He sniffed the air, and Jarod realized that the Gilnean was taking in the intruder's scent, perhaps even marking whether there was the sweat one associated with lying or fear. "I know of whom you speak. He'll not want to talk with you." "I would just like to have the chance. Let him say so and I will leave."
The worgen's ears flattened and his brow furrowed. Finally, reluctantly, he gestured the direction Jarod had been heading. "That way. Not far." When the lupine figure did not move, the night elf turned and started walking as indicated. Although he did not hear the worgen behind him, he knew that the creature was following. They climbed a short hill, then descended the other side. Jarod could not help but feel that more eyes now watched him from beyond the surrounding trees. Without warning, another worgen leapt into sight in front of them. Having expected something, Jarod did not even flinch as the newcomer first landed on all fours, then sleekly rose to face the night elf. It was the worgen for whom he had been searching. The fur was unmistakable. What was also unmistakable was the worgen's displeasure at Jarod's arrival. "You . . . you shouldn't have ever come back here. . . . " To the worgen who had led the night elf to this place, he growled, "And you should know better!" The other Gilnean's ears flattened and a slight whining sound escaped him. The second worgen dismissed him with a curt wave that displayed for Jarod the long, so very sharp claws. The chief worgen then turned his gaze toward the trees. Ears pricking up, he let out a slight snarl. Jarod heard nothing, but a few seconds later the worgen relaxed slightly. "We're alone now," the worgen announced with confidence. The night elf did not ask how the other could be certain. He trusted in the worgen's senses. "I appreciate your talking with me-" "I've not said I would! You should've known the last time you were here that you weren't wanted!" As he spoke, the worgen's muzzle neared Jarod's face. One snap from the savage jaws could have easily ended the conversation-provided the Gilnean could have accomplished that before Jarod's sword impaled him. That the night elf kept the blade at his side and not in his hand in no manner gave the worgen advantage; Jarod's reflexes had not slowed that much over the millennia. As if sensing that he could not cow the night elf, the worgen pulled his muzzle back slightly. The two eyed each other for a moment. "I am sorry," Jarod finally replied calmly. "I came alone so as to not disturb
matters any more than necessary. If I can speak with you for a moment, you will not hear from me again." The worgen snarled but finally nodded. "Ask what you want quickly!" "My name is Jarod Shadowsong-" "I care nothing for your name! Ask your damned questions!" The former guard captain nodded. "You did not say anything about being the one to rescue me from that trap." "Which should have been enough to tell you I wanted nothing more to do with it. It was a moment of weakness. . . . " But in the worgen's tone there was the first hint of sympathy. "I couldn't leave you there, though." "For which I will always owe you. But tell me, why were you there in the first place?" The Gilnean looked away. "We know of the spellcasters' murders. We know that we are believed by some to be the culprits! My lord ordered otherwise, but some of us decided to seek answers ourselves." "And did you find anything?" The worgen glared at the heavens. "Yes. We found we die quite easily, too, when snared by traps like the one that caught you!" Jarod started. "One of yours perished?" "The trap was not exactly the same. As with yours, it was all but invisible, only the telltale sign of withered foliage where the trap was set revealing its presence. That was how I discovered the one that caught you. This trait we learned, unfortunately, in retrospect from the loss we suffered." "I am sorry." His companion nodded in acceptance of Jarod's sympathy. "We could not free her in time. Like yours, it first tortured, yes, but then it made certain that if one managed to escape, a second element would seize the heart from within." He bared his teeth in remembrance of the foul deed. "We found later that her heart had literally exploded." "By Elune!" "You see now why I did what I could to release you." "Where did this happen?" The worgen again bared his teeth. "Not all that far from where you met your disaster. That was why I was near: I wanted to study the place where she died to see if there was any clue that would help us avenge her."
"And was there?" "The only clue was the trap that nearly did you in, night elf." The Gilnean's ears flattened. "There's no more I can tell you." The finality in the Gilnean's tone made it clear that Jarod should not try to push. The night elf understood. "I appreciate what you have told me. It should help." "I doubt it. Your sister seems set on blaming us." "Maiev will see that what needs to be done will be done," Jarod replied somewhat defensively. "She has always upheld her duty to our people." "But we are not your people." With that, the worgen stepped back to depart. Jarod started to do the same, but paused. "If you think of anything more, you know my name." The worgen snorted . . . then hesitated. "And mine's Eadrik. I trust you with that on the assumption that you'll keep it to yourself." "Of course." The Gilnean vanished among the trees. Jarod stood there for a moment, wondering whether he had accomplished anything. The worgen's words milled around in his head as he tried to make sense of it all. Tried to make sense of it all . . . and prayed that no other Highborne would be assassinated before he could.
21
A LINE DRAWN
The scouts came rushing back to Haldrissa, who suddenly discovered that she had dozed off in the saddle. Fortunately, neither Denea nor any of the other officers noticed, as they were more caught up in the startled looks of the returning Sentinels. Haldrissa made a quick count and came up two short. Yet, although the scouts rode with much urgency, they did not move as if the Horde were on their heels. Unfortunately, the news they brought might as well have been such. Silverwing had fallen. The scouts had only sketchy information. It was not until a few moments later that those who could much better attest to the disaster arrived. The once-proud Silverwing Sentinels had been reduced to perhaps a quarter of their strength, and many of those were wounded. Among their survivors was the acting commander, Su'ura, who related the terrifying tale of the outpost's fall. Haldrissa grimly listened to the news, all the while thinking that the end of the world as she knew it had finally come. Even the Cataclysm had not touched her this way. Silverwing was gone. The Horde was sweeping over Ashenvale . . . with Garrosh Hellscream himself leading the way. "We should ride to meet them now!" snapped Denea. "They will never expect us to be so close already! We will catch them by surprise!" Several of the other younger Sentinels voiced their support. Haldrissa noticed that Su'ura-no coward-was not among them. Nor was the "scout"
who stood near her, and the senior commander would have expected such a one to be the first to demand they turn and fight. "No," Haldrissa quietly announced. "We will not." Denea gaped. "But the whole purpose of our march was to meet up with Silverwing in order to better secure a line of defense against the Horde-" "There was more to it than that, but the point is . . . Silverwing is no more. That changes everything. We cannot properly set up a good line of defense in this region, and attacking the Horde right now would play into their hands. You heard her report and you know what we ourselves experienced. The Horde has new strategies, and if Garrosh Hellscream is at the forefront, they will have more to throw at us than what we have seen thus far." "You are not suggesting we turn back?" Denea's arguing was bordering on insubordination, but under the circumstances Haldrissa forgave her. "Only as far as just west of the river. We cross and then take up a position not far from it. Let them struggle across. We will better bring them down as they try." It was clear that Denea and some of the others still looked more interested in supposedly surprising the Horde by moving forward and attacking, but they obeyed orders. Su'ura and Illiyana organized the survivors. Those too weak were given mounts. They turned about and headed back. Haldrissa had Denea take command of a squad that would protect the rear of the column. While outspoken, Haldrissa's second would make certain that she followed through with her instructions and kept everyone safe from possible Horde scouts seeking to pick off stragglers. They made good time, in part because, having just come from that direction, they knew the path very well. Recalling the incursions into Alliance territory by the orcs, the senior commander still sent scouts ahead, just in case. They faced no threat at the river and crossed easily. Haldrissa chose a location that would give them an open area in front of them that would make any army charging toward their position easy targets for the archers. She then set about dividing her fighters along the region. Day passed into night and into day again. Having fought the Horde at all hours during the course of her career, Haldrissa had become quite used to the daytime despite being of a nocturnal race. She sent messengers to the nearest
other outposts and was rewarded with answers from both. The contact enabled the Alliance to build a better line along the western side of the river. During all that time, there were no active signs of the Horde, and although Denea pressed for Haldrissa to let her take a scouting party to the enemy's location, the senior commander refused. Yet, they all wondered why the Horde had not followed up its victory at Silverwing by pushing forward and meeting the Sentinels head-on. Su'ura could offer no details from the attack that shed any light, and none of her staff's suggestions satisfied Haldrissa. Garrosh Hellscream was waiting for something -likely some opportunity-and the defenders would not know what it was until he finally moved. Another day passed, then two. Haldrissa finally gave in to her second's constant request and let her take a band to cautiously seek the Horde's lines. It was not until night that Denea returned. To Haldrissa's relief, her party remained intact. However, the younger Sentinel's puzzled look did not sit well with the commanding officer. "They are gathered as if ready to march," Denea said. "I have never seen such an army! Legions of restive orc warriors-some on foot, others riding great wolves-row upon row of tauren armed with axes or spears and chanting to their guiding spirits, goblin shredders in numbers never seen, howling trolls who adorn their armor with skulls . . . and more and more!" She took a deep breath and finally explained the cause of her confusion. "But even though many of their warriors are clearly eager for bloodshed, their commanders are holding them back." "You saw their strength?" "They have put together a powerful force," the other reluctantly answered. "Enough to crush us." "And they are waiting? Did you see anything else?" "I saw the goblins working on their infernal mechanisms, including some wagons that look to be the source of that foul-smelling mist. Other than that, nothing out of the ordinary." Haldrissa recalled more of Su'ura's report. "Catapults?" "A few. The same type we have seen in the past. Not very accurate things." That dismissive description did not sit well with the veteran officer, who well remembered Su'ura's words concerning the near perfection with which the
boulders had been lobbed into Silverwing. If these were indeed the same catapults, then the orcs had trained their crews well . . . in fact, better than ever. The catapults somewhat explained the reason the Horde might not yet have attacked, such heavy equipment always slower to bring to the front. Yet, that still did not satisfy Haldrissa. Either Garrosh had the expectation of more troops arriving to strengthen his force or he waited for the Sentinels to do something. But what could that be? she asked herself again. The growing numbers on the Horde's side forced Haldrissa to make a decision that she had not wanted. Sending messengers back, she called in every available Sentinel to be brought up to the lines. The Alliance had to hold here. If they allowed the orcs to make any deeper headway into western Ashenvale, they risked losing the entire region. To her surprise, it was not the reinforcements she had summoned who first arrived. Rather, it was a herald, riding like the wind. At first, Haldrissa feared that somehow Garrosh had gotten around her line and had attacked the outposts behind, but the rider looked anything but horrified as he jumped off his panting nightsaber. "Help has arrived!" he called to her, heedless of the fact that others heard his triumphant shout. "The Horde will pay for Silverwing!" "What are you saying?" Haldrissa demanded as Denea and others gathered. "Are the reinforcements from the western outposts on their way already?" "They and many more, Commander! They and many more! Our ships landed this morning! The others have already disembarked and pushed victoriously through the Horde stronghold of Zoram'gar Outpost, where they met with little resistance!" "'Disembarked'? What do you mean? Who? Where are these reinforcements from?" "Darnassus! Your messenger made it to Darnassus!" "Aradria?" Denea blurted. "She lives?" Some of the rider's joy momentarily faded. "Only long enough to tell all she knew. Then her spirit rose to join the Mother Moon." "Brave," Haldrissa remarked. "She will be honored." "I will make certain ten orcs pay for her life," growled Denea. The commander had no time for bravado. Battle had a way of reducing a warrior's desire to simply surviving. To the rider she asked, "And does General
Shandris lead them?" "Nay, though she has come too." The male night elf could not keep from grinning. "It is the high priestess herself who heads the expedition!" "The high priestess?" All around them, Sentinels looked stunned, awed. Haldrissa could scarcely believe what she heard. "Tyrande Whisperwind is in Ashenvale?" "Yes . . . and soon, she will be among us. So she promises!" The startling news could not help but lighten the Sentinels' hearts. The high priestess, the voice of Elune on Azeroth, not only had heard the peril of her servants but had come to personally lead them to victory over the Horde. "The orcs were fools to wait," Denea said with relish. "You were right to have us hold, Commander! Now they will pay for Silverwing . . . pay a hundredfold!" Haldrissa, too, felt her confidence rising. Garrosh Hellscream was a foe with whom to be reckoned, but against Tyrande Whisperwind, who had some ten millennia more experience in war, the orc surely had no chance. Final victory, Haldrissa told herself, would be the Alliance's. And yet . . . she could not help glancing toward the direction of the enemy and wondering. •   •   •
She should be in Ashenvale by now, Malfurion thought sourly. She is in Ashenvale while I go around hunting shadows. . . . That was not exactly the truth. Maiev and her brother were doing much of the investigating, while Malfurion spent most of his time trying to get the Highborne to see reason. The Highborne were becoming angrier and angrier at the lack of success. They had begun to do some investigations of their own, especially Var'dyn. Unfortunately, that had put them at odds with many of the people of Darnassus. Malfurion had already had to step in once to stop bloodshed. Even Mordent no longer had much patience. He and Malfurion stood at the edge of the Highborne encampment, separating after three fruitless hours of debate on the best course of action. "I have tried to restrain the younger ones, like Var'dyn, enough, Archdruid. I find I no longer care to stop them."
Malfurion remembered all too well how close Var'dyn had come to unleashing his magic on the night elves angrily surrounding him. They had not taken kindly to his imperious questioning and not-so-subtle threats when he had been asking after the two murders. "We are doing the best anyone can. Maiev -" "Had better show results. I understand her reputation. I fail to see anything that supports it. She has badgered us over and over on a variety of leads, some of which infer that perhaps the assassins are among our own. If this is the best she can do for this matter-" "She has been questioning everyone, Mordent. No one could be more thorough." Malfurion sighed. "I will talk with her and see if there is anything else." "At least her brother has some tact, not that he has been any more efficient. Still, he shows proper respect." The archdruid refrained from commenting. Jarod did indeed have more tact. "We will solve this." "As you say," the Highborne concluded, his tone doubtful. "Fare you well." Malfurion nodded, then headed toward Darnassus. However, he had not gotten far when he sensed that he was again not alone. He glanced over his shoulder but saw nothing. Malfurion turned his attention back to his trek. The armored figure that now stood in the path ahead had her cloak drawn around her, turning her into a dark, ominous image that surely even Illidan had found daunting at times. "Archdruid Malfurion," Maiev greeted him. He glanced over his shoulder at where he had left the Highborne. Malfurion and Maiev were uncomfortably close. "What reason brings you out here?" "A question or two concerning the assassinations that I need Var'dyn or his master to answer. I think it might clear something up in my mind." "You have found something?" She exhaled. "I would rather not say until I know how it turns out." Malfurion accepted that, but was still uncertain as to the wisdom of her current intentions. "You must speak with them?" Maiev chuckled. "Have I been annoying them?" "This is no laughing matter." Jarod's sister sobered. "No. Not where the Highborne are concerned. You
are right." "Is this questioning necessary?" "I do nothing without reason. And you need not fear that I will upset them so much that they will go running into Darnassus. I heard about Var'dyn. That one is going to be a problem." "He will be fine if this all gets settled." She frowned, but answered, "Yes, I suppose he will." "Be cautious, Maiev." "I will be." With a slight bow, Jarod's sister moved on. Malfurion watched her for a few seconds. Maiev did not look back. He shook his head. Driven by duty, even if it means walking into danger. Malfurion was suddenly struck by immense guilt. It was in great part due to him that she had become so obsessive with her tasks. She had watched over his brother for millennia because Malfurion had shown Illidan mercy. The archdruid felt tremendous responsibility for Maiev; he did not want to see her suffer more than she already had in her life. And if she baited the Highborne too much while questioning them, there was a very good chance that she would suffer greatly. Alone again, Malfurion welcomed the tranquility of the forest. The urge to simply settle down somewhere and meditate-even go to the Emerald Dream for a time-grew stronger. But not strong enough. The Cataclysm had created many situations requiring the druids' efforts and Malfurion was needed to guide those efforts. More important, however, was the fact that Tyrande even now moved to lead the night elves and their allies against the Horde. If there was even the slightest chance that she might need his help, Malfurion was willing to sacrifice himself, if necessary. The local trees greeted him. They were grateful for his appearance, in great part due to the Highborne living so nearby. The spellcasters made the forest wary; the trees especially could sense the inherent danger in their magic. The archdruid calmed the trees as best he could. However, there was little he could tell them other than that the Highborne would not be casting great spells around them. Malfurion had promised to treat Mordent's people with respect, and part of that meant allowing them to practice their craft on occasion
. . . but only in a limited way and only in a designated area closer to their encampment, where the druids had set safeguards in place. The archmage kept most of his people under control, but, as Malfurion knew, some of the more ambitious, like Var'dyn, had to be watched more. Even here, Malfurion could sense the residue of some arcane spell. Once the murders were solved, the archdruid would have to have a word with Mordent about Var'dyn's grasp on where the line was drawn. Malfurion continued walking as he communed with the trees and other forest life. He had to return to the temple to see to some of the more mundane aspects of leadership. There were those seeking an audience, requisitions to confirm . . . things that as an ordinary druid he would never have had to deal. It made him feel all the more guilty to think of the millennia that Tyrande had dutifully worked to see to the best for their people while he had been . . . away. Someone else approached. Frowning, Malfurion sighted two grim Sentinels. "Hail to you, Archdruid Malfurion," the senior of the two greeted. "What is it?" "We have report of another assassination." The news struck Malfurion dumb for a moment. He stood there, waiting to be told they were in error, but realizing quickly that it was something that he had been expecting. "Where?" "In the deep woods farther north from here. The one called Neva sent the news to us, then went to find Maiev." Maiev. It only stood to reason that she should also be informed . . . and yet, the archdruid hesitated to go after her. He had promised the Highborne that these dread crimes would be solved. Another death would only cause things to boil over beyond even his control. Neva will eventually inform Maiev. I need to make a study of the scene as soon as possible. . . . Having satisfied himself in regards to the notifying of Jarod's sister, Malfurion indicated to the pair to lead the way. The Sentinels turned. At first, out of respect for the archdruid, they kept a slower, more even pace. Only when Malfurion purposely took a step or two ahead of them did they finally seem to realize that he preferred speed over propriety. Although he had a vague notion as to where they journeyed, he was glad
that his guides knew the exact location. Malfurion had to assume either that the Highborne had been lured out here or that, like the one Jarod had discovered, the victim had been moved after death. Even still, his impatience swelled. Eyeing yet another hill to climb, he finally asked, "How much longer?" "According to what we were told, it should be just over this rise, Archdruid." "Good." He picked up his pace again, moving ahead of the Sentinels. The trees around him suddenly shook with warning. The archdruid glanced up at them, reading their fear. However, it was not fear for themselves . . . but rather him. He raised a hand, already casting. At the same time Malfurion shouted, "Get back! There is a-" He felt as if flames had burst all around him, although he could see nothing. Behind him, Malfurion heard the Sentinels scream. A horrific crackling sound assailed his ears and he suddenly felt not only as if his body were on fire but also as if his skin were being flayed. Somehow, Malfurion managed to take a step forward. The agony increased, but for some reason the archdruid knew that his best hope was to keep pushing on. In the back of his mind he sensed that the trees were urging him. The cries of his escorts had faded away. The archdruid could do nothing for them. First he had to save himself. If there was any chance of healing the pair, he could then try. Otherwise they were all surely dead. He managed another step. The pain lessened ever so slightly. Through the struggle, Malfurion heard an angry voice. So in pain was he that even had it been someone with whom he was familiar, he could not have identified it. The archdruid only knew that the speaker was very near. Then, for just a brief moment, the voice became very clear . . . and even closer. "Why do you not just die already?" Something struck Malfurion on the head.
22
RITUAL
Genn watched his people continue their preparations to depart. It was with a heavy heart that he had decided to take this course of action, but there was no more reason to stay near Darnassus, and doing so only deepened the shame of the worgen's rejection, at least in his eyes. Varian's disappearance after the hunt had come as a great blow to the Gilnean king. After the obvious bond that had developed, the other monarch's abrupt behavior had eradicated Genn's last hope that the worgen would be accepted by the Alliance. With that hope gone, Genn's choice had been clear. Eadrik was nowhere to be found, but otherwise the rest of his aides had the situation well in hand. Another day or two and there would be nothing left to mark the encampment's former occupants. The hair on the back of his neck suddenly stood on end. Someone was behind him. As with many worgen, Genn more often than not remained in his lupine form. He felt stronger, younger that way. When human, the king felt the aches of age. But being worgen now meant that the one behind him had failed if his attempt had been to sneak up on Genn. Moving with the swiftness and grace of the worgen shape, he turned to meet the potential threat with claws and teeth. But instead of doing battle, Genn found himself standing in utter bewilderment. "Varian Wrynn?"
Varian could not blame his counterpart for being so stunned. The lord of
Stormwind himself felt like an absolute fool, or at least someone who certainly did not know his own mind.
Although on the one hand the hunt had served to do as Malfurion had surely desired, it had also revealed to Varian the utter inconsistencies of many of his own beliefs and prejudices. Suddenly overwhelmed, Varian had chosen the one recourse he felt open to him at that moment: he had retreated in the face of the worgen's honor of him-an honor he felt he did not deserve-and had plunged deeper into the forest, his destination not even known to him. With Anduin gone, Varian had felt no desire to return to Darnassus. His quarters, while built with the night elves' love of nature in mind, had still been part of a city, part of his life as a king, not as a man. The vibrancy of the forest, with its abundance of life, of freedom, had given him some respite, but had not eased his confused mind as much as he had hoped. Instead, Varian had discovered too late that the quiet and calm around him only better served to bring into focus all his misjudgments and prejudices. He had lost all track of time, night coming and day returning without his caring. With day had come the knowledge that Varian could not simply abandon everything for the purity of the forest. For his love for his son, for his people, and for his hopes for redemption, Varian had come to a decision. It had to do much with the realization that there were others who had struggled hard with the darker side of their nature, perhaps even in a way that he never had. The worgen. And so, after returning to his quarters to quell the growing anxieties of his retinue-and finding that Malfurion had already assured them that their ruler was merely "indisposed"-he had sought out Genn Greymane once more. "You left," the Gilnean monarch said with some condemnation in his tone. "We honored you and you simply left. I sought word of you from Darnassus, but the archdruid only said not to worry, that you needed time to yourself." The wisdom of the night elf continued to amaze Varian. "He was right. I had much to consider . . . and when I was done considering all of it, I knew that I had to find you and your people again." "You want something of us? What? We've nothing. No land, no gold. You have everything. Everything." "Not everything. I need your help, Genn." The other king stared without understanding. Considering their previous
encounters, Varian could not blame him. "How can I possibly help you?" the worgen muttered. "I know something about the worgen curse and the-ferocity-of it . . . but you and yours control that urge, not give in to it." "Ah!" Genn not only nodded in understanding but even showed some sympathy rather than disdain. "I always wondered how anyone could survive what you did and stay intact inside. . . ." "I didn't." Varian felt uncomfortable even speaking of it. "Tell me what you did." "It's not as simple as that, my friend. You have to be willing to look deep within yourself, find your balance. . . ." "I'll fight a hundred orcs barehanded, if that's what's needed-" The worgen laughed sadly. "Trust me from experience. That might be simpler. We lost several before we were shown the correct ritual by the night elf Belysra Starbreeze. They were consumed by the curse, became beasts without hearts, without souls." Genn looked off into his memories. "We had to put them down. The ritual is still fraught with danger. Now and then, there are those who do not survive it." Varian was not dissuaded. "Better I die trying than to keep on like I am, Genn. I've lost my wife and now my son. Anduin may be gone forever and it's because of me. . . ." "I lost a son as well," the king of Gilneas murmured. "Although Liam is gone forever, killed saving my life from a poisoned arrow fired by the leader of the Forsaken, the Banshee Queen, Sylvanas, when we sought to retake Gilneas City." Genn shook his head. "I don't downplay what's happened between you and your boy. 'Tis a terrible, terrible thing, whether by death or the separation of miles, if permanent. I know your loss there, Varian. . . . " The worgen leader peered over his shoulder at his people, some of whom had paused at sight of the recognizable newcomer in their midst. His brow furrowed in deep thought. "We can guide you into the ritual, but how you come through it depends much upon you. To conquer yourself-your own worst foe-requires tranquility, balance, and, last and by no means easy, ultimate mastery of your fury. Three struggles, not one." "Three or a hundred, I'll face what needs to be faced. Show me, Genn." The worgen nodded. "May your ability be as great as your determination."
Genn did not lead him among the other Gilneans, but rather skirted to the south and then east. However, as they walked, several other worgen left their tasks and began following. "Why are they following?" "The ritual needs to be overseen by more than just one." The lord of Stormwind frowned. "How do they know what we're planning? You gave no sign." Genn's lupine features showed some slight wry amusement. "None that you saw." A few more worgen, both male and female, joined in the group trailing behind the pair. They moved in silence, seeming like bearers at a funeral. Varian's hand instinctively shifted nearer to his knife but did not actually touch it. Genn led him to a small clearing surrounded by trees whose branches reminded Varian of grasping fingers. The Gilnean ruler guided his charge to the center of the clearing. "This is where we've made do since our arrival," Genn explained. The clearing itself appeared unremarkable save for three simple wells sunk on the opposite side from where they had entered. The fact that those wells were here signified to Varian that they had some importance to what was to take place. That was verified a moment later by the sudden emergence from the woods behind the wells of three druids. At first, Varian expected Malfurion to step out as well, but only the trio-two males and a female-moved toward the wells and the worgen. He did not recognize any of them other than as night elves. They wore solemn expressions and eyed the worgen as if looking for something. "Who is it to be?" the middle one-his blue hair bound in two long braids trailing nearly to his waist and a smaller one thrusting upward from the back of his head-asked of Genn. The Gilnean ruler indicated his counterpart. "This one, Lyros Swiftwind. I give you Varian Wrynn." The druids looked startled. Lyros muttered, "But he is no worgen." "Yet, still he suffers as we did before attaining balance," Genn explained. "The fury within him is no less than that of any of us, possibly even more."
"Please step forward," the female requested. Varian obeyed. The three druids each placed a hand on the king's shoulders, then closed their eyes. They studied the lord of Stormwind so for a moment before opening their eyes and withdrawing their hands. Lyros looked at his companions, who nodded to the monarchs. "We see it now," he said to Varian. "Welcome, Varian Wrynn. We are honored with your presence and, as keepers of these wells, will do what we can for you . . . though I think it best that Genn Greymane be your guide for this." "I'd prefer that," Varian replied. "I'll be glad to," Genn added. The other male druid-his short, narrow beard and closer-cut hair both green-extended his palm. In it Varian saw a single long, silvery leaf that tapered at the point. "Take this. Eat it. It is a moonleaf, a symbol of both nature and the Mother Moon. It will help prepare your mind for the ritual." Varian took it without question. He expected the leaf to be bitter, but instead it had a soft, soothing texture and proved easy to swallow once chewed. "Now you must drink from each of the wells." With Genn beside him, Varian followed the druids to the first of the three wells. Here, the second of the two males took over once more. "I am Talran of the Wild and this is the Well of Tranquility," the druid said, handing Varian a small mug filled with what simply looked like water. "What you drink now will help you rekindle the peace and joy lost so early in your life." Varian took the mug and calmly swallowed the contents. When he returned the mug, the druid bowed his head. Lyros gestured toward the second well. Genn looked a little surprised. "He's to drink from all three at once?" "For his journey, yes. We believe it must be so." At the second well the female druid, her green hair flowing behind her, served Varian. "I am Vassandra Stormclaw and this is the Well of Balance. What you drink will keep your mind and body as one, thus enabling you to stand with both parts unified for the struggle you take on." The contents tasted much the same to Varian, who thus far felt no different from either mug of water. As he handed back the mug, the lead druid indicated
the third and final well. "I am Lyros Swiftwind," the night elf said. "And this is the Well of Fury." The druid handed Varian the last mug. "What you drink will enhance the first two mugs you took and also build within you the strength you need to confront and, hopefully, command that which most risks this ritual ending in failure." Lyros did not explain further. The king of Stormwind downed the contents, then waited expectantly. The lead druid nodded to the worgen leader. "Genn Greymane, you know what must be done from here on." "I do. Follow me, Varian." As they stepped from the druids, Varian suddenly felt as if all his senses had begun to heighten. In doing so, they enabled him to notice some unsettling details he had missed concerning the area. Many of the tree trunks had scars that looked suspiciously as if some beast had madly slashed at them again and again. There were also areas where the ground had been churned up, though not so recently that there was not grass growing atop most of those places. He also smelled the scent of dried blood. "Back in Gilneas, where my people were the first worgen to go through the ritual, there were those who required more effort to come to grips with themselves than others," Genn explained, as if aware of what Varian was noticing. "We learned hard from that, very hard, sometimes. When our journey brought us to Darnassus, we planned this place accordingly and it's served us thus far." The worgen leader gestured to the others. They spread around the clearing, forming a loose circle. Varian estimated how many steps it would take for one of them to close with him. Enough that he could draw his knife, but not much longer than that. "We shall sit here." Genn smoothly positioned himself with legs crossed, then waited while Varian did the same. "Now what? I close my eyes? That simple?" Genn's ears flattened. "If you try, then it's that simple. If you give up already . . . not simple at all." Frowning deeper, Varian shut his eyes. Immediately, his other trained senses heightened. He heard not only his own breathing, but Genn's. The worgen's musky smell wafted under his nostrils. A light wind grazed Varian's skin and
slightly tousled his hair. "Your senses are very acute. You could be worgen," he heard Genn say with some astonishment. Then, more neutral, the other king began. "Focus. The water from the three wells will aid, but you are the one who must find where to begin. For that, you must look into your memories." "For what?" When Genn answered, it was as if he spoke from much farther away. "For those points most relevant to your life . . . and the choices you made because of them for good or ill. Start with the oldest you recall and do more than just remember them. Relive them. Be aware why you did what you did and what that means to you." Eyes still shut, Varian shifted uneasily. "There's no point in going back and doing that-" "Then there's no point in continuing," Genn returned, seeming even farther away. His voice also took on a whispery quality, as if the wind carried it. Varian grunted. "All right. I'll do it." Gritting his teeth, the former gladiator focused on his past, trying to summon those memories that had for so long remained undesired. He looked far back, thinking of when he was the son and his father the king. Suddenly he was once again a small boy. A sense of peace draped over him. Varian felt such comfort that for a moment he simply dwelled in it. Then, the figure of his father dominated the scene. Varian held Llane's hand as the king assisted him in learning to ride his first horse-more a pony, to be truthful. But the riding lasted only moments before the scene shifted to Llane overseeing one of Varian's first fighting lessons. Varian realized then that he had handled a blade barely better than his own son, but Llane's encouragement had helped Varian better learn from his instructors. The tranquility of those days softened Varian's heart. Still the young boy, he looked up at his father. That was when the assassin struck. Llane fell, dead. His slayer, the female half-orc called Garona, loomed like a sinister giant over Varian, who was now suddenly some thirteen years old. Screaming, tears pouring down his face, young Varian lunged at the killer. Events had not played out this way-in real life, he had not entered the room until the half-orc had already murdered his father-but now they mixed with
Varian's turbulent emotions of that time. But Garona disappeared. Llane's face, contorted in death, filled Varian's thoughts. The teenage version wanted to cry out for his father, but no sound came from his straining mouth. Then the tragic memory became mixed with others. With Llane dead, the capital was vulnerable. The orcs, who had already invaded the kingdom four years previous, now overran the great city. The capital fell as brutal axes slew hundreds. Everything wonderful about his childhood vanished. No peace. No tranquility. But unlike in times past, Varian now realized that the good memories had always remained with him. Even though violence had taken his childhood, it could not erase what he had lived prior . . . not unless Varian allowed it to do so. And that was what he had always done. But not now. Despite what had happened to his father and Stormwind, Varian at last embraced what had been before. His father had never ceased loving him and had proven that time and again. Varian had only shoved that knowledge aside. And now, aware of that, he felt the peace remain within him. Whatever trials had come after the assassination and Stormwind's fall, Varian would always have his childhood. The past could not be changed, but that meant for the good as well as the ill. Tranquility . . . Although he managed to keep his eyes shut, the voice startled him, for it sounded like his as a child mixed with that of his father. Yet, though Varian accepted what had happened, he no longer wished to dwell on it. Instead, his mind sought some other memory to counter what had happened to his father and kingdom . . . and Tiffin naturally occurred to him. Varian was no longer a child, but an insecure youth caught between the changes both within himself and the world around him. There was much that he had already learned to hide from those closest to him, such as Prince Arthas of Lordaeron and that boy's father, King Terenas-who had also, in some ways, become a second father to Varian. Overall, to others, the young lord of Stormwind had appeared a diplomatic, intelligent, and upbeat ruler wiser than his years. However, the scars within could not always be kept hidden, and
servants especially would become familiar with his occasional bouts of despair. That had all changed with Tiffin. He saw her again as she had been when first they met. A calm and wondrous golden spirit contrasting sharply with his wild, dark self. Varian loved her for the first time again as she strode toward him, even though the first thing he did when she spoke with him was to brush her off in such an arrogant manner that any other person would have rightly fled. But Tiffin did not. Again she danced with him, laughed with him, and brought out the good in Varian to balance the unchecked. In some ways, even more than his father, Tiffin helped Varian become the king the people loved. And yet . . . Varian struggled to keep the memory away, but could not. And yet . . . the people were the very ones who killed her. She lay dead at his feet, slain during a riot. An innocent victim of a time when everything had gone mad. Reliving it, Varian nearly slipped back into his darkness . . . but that would have been the ultimate disdain for his beloved. Tiffin had made of him a better man, a worthy leader. Varian finally saw that he had constantly insulted her memory with his later actions. Tiffin would have never acted as he had. She had always forgiven, always sought to do her best for those she loved. If Varian hoped to redeem himself to her memory, he would have to do the same. Varian steeled himself against the images of her death, doing instead what he knew she would have hoped of him. He was right to grieve, but he also had to move on . . . and learn. Most of all, he could continue to learn from her life, use it as the example of how he should confront all of the issues he continued to face as a father, man, and monarch. . . . Balance . . . Again the voice startled him, this time because he heard not only his own voice, but also that of Tiffin. Varian imagined her again, only this time with the culmination of their love held in her arms. Anduin . . . Anduin was all that he had left of family, the most precious member of all, for in the boy was his mother. For the years that they had been together before Varian's vanishing, he had tried to be the father Llane had been. Without Tiffin
it had been difficult, but Varian recalled times when he and Anduin had laughed together. He also recalled the fear that he had felt so often when something had threatened his only child. Indeed, fear for Anduin had driven much of Varian's later life. He now stood as himself, watching his son, then but three, fall from a pony and almost break an arm. Varian again did battle with an assassin who had snuck into the keep and, in what had too much even then reminded the king of his own father's death, nearly stabbed young Anduin. Fear . . . Varian refused to give in to it anymore. Fear would only make him helpless against those things that threatened his son and his kingdom. Merely thinking of all those who might harm Anduin was enough to throw Varian into a rage, just as it had so many times prior. However, even as his anger rose, he again saw himself grabbing Anduin's arm . . . and was suddenly reminded how that rage and the fear fueling it had sent Anduin from him. With that realization, Varian turned on his own rage. Where it had in the past always commanded him, now he sought to seize control of it. His rage could be a powerful, devastating force, and Varian saw that simply giving in to it did him little good overall and usually more harm in the long run. True, it aided him greatly during battle-the only time when he could truly unleash it- but beyond that, it was a double-edged weapon. But although the rage no longer commanded him, it also did not abate. Varian felt the struggle within himself. If he allowed the rage to grow, he accomplished nothing, he realized. He would be the same man that Anduin had left. And so, Varian held tight to the rage as if it were a horse needing to be broken, and worked to master it. It would no longer aid in further ruining his life; it would have purpose. Varian knew only one purpose too. If battle was the single place where his rage did him any good, then it would be where he would channel that force. He would let it fuel his strength against the dragon Deathwing and the orcs and their allies. . . . The rage surrendered to his will. He had broken its hold over him and now it would serve Varian, not the other way around. Tranquility . . . balance . . . fury . . . came the voice that was his . . . and now also that of someone whom he did not recognize even though he felt he should. The beast must be conquered so that the man may rise. . . . The rage must be the
servant for the man to be . . . complete. . . . Varian felt his fury growing, but now it did so at his direction. It was now bound to his strength, not his despair. Once again, he felt Tiffin, Anduin, his father, and others who had played loved or vital roles in his life surround him. They had never stopped believing in him, not even his son. He saw that Anduin had done what he had for not only his own sake, but in the hopes that it would enable his father to come to terms with himself. The rage filled him. However, because it had been transformed into a weapon instead of remaining simply a manic force, he welcomed it. With it at his command, no foe could stand against him. From somewhere, a proud howl echoed. Varian responded to it. He finally knew who called out to him. Goldrinn. Lo'Gosh. The wolf Ancient. Lo'Gosh summoned him to battle. Images again coursed before him of those who would seek to harm the ones under his care, especially Anduin. In this new vision, Deathwing laughed as he landed on Stormwind, the mad leviathan savoring the destruction of both Varian's home and countless lands as his power over the very earth caused Azeroth to churn. The world still sought to recover from that evil . . . but it was a battle that Varian understood would take time and careful planning to win. For now, there was another, more immediate threat. He knew the face, knew the name, even before this other foe took the place of the dragon in the king's mind. Garrosh Hellscream. Thinking of the Horde leader, Varian summoned his rage to the forefront and tested it. It grew as it never could have as merely a destructive force. Now tempered, now shaped, it was greater than it had ever been. Lo'Gosh howled again. Varian leapt to his feet, awake without having noticed that he had been asleep. Genn Greymane no longer sat directly before him, and perhaps that was a good thing, for it allowed the Gilnean monarch, originally standing a few feet away, to jump back as Varian surged forward. Even though Genn retained his worgen form, he still appeared to move as if in a dream to the king of Stormwind. The entire tableau seemed to have slowed down. Varian surveyed the other worgen, and though they were swift to recover from their shock, their movement yet struck him as slightly slower than his own.
"Goldrinn . . . ," Genn muttered, staring. "Lo'Gosh . . . his aura . . . it surrounds you so completely. . . ." Around them, the ears of the other worgen flattened, but in awe, not fear. "Goldrinn truly touches your heart, your soul . . . ," Genn murmured. "The wolf honors you, and so-so do we. . . ." Varian said nothing, but he, too, was at last able to sense what Genn had known from the beginning. The ghost of the great wolf had made him its chosen, its champion. And through Goldrinn-Lo'Gosh-and himself, Varian knew what had to be done next. "I've been reckless, driven by not only bitterness from losing so many things -so many people-of importance to me, but also the fear of losing what little I still cherish, like my son," Varian said to Genn and the other worgen. "But now I understand. Azeroth needs us. All of you-and me-we are what we've become in order to help it. And help it we must. . . ." Silence reigned around him. Finally, Genn asked, "What would you have us do?" Varian knew of only one thing. "We follow our destiny together . . . and we follow it to Ashenvale."
23
PURIFICATION
Malfurion stirred. He could not say how long he had been unconscious, only that it had been quite some time. At least a day, possibly more. As he slowly became aware of his surroundings, he noticed a more troubling thing. He could barely feel his body. It was as if his dream-form had separated from it, yet the archdruid knew that he remained on the mortal plane, not the Emerald Dream. His head suddenly pounded. Malfurion tried to relax, and the pounding eased. That verified what he feared. He was someone's prisoner, someone who knew something about a druid's abilities. Malfurion cautiously tried to open his eyes. He began with slits first and when that offered no greater pounding, he pushed for more. What he saw was that he floated several feet above the ground. Malfurion tried to turn his head, but the pounding returned, this time accompanied by a terrible pain reminiscent of what he had suffered before someone had struck him on the head. The archdruid was forced to shut his eyes and relax again. Once things settled, he contented himself with looking ahead and trying to guess more from what his peripheral vision offered. His feet were barely visible and spread some distance apart. From that he judged that he was bound between two trunks. Someone had gone to great trouble to secure him, which seemed odd, considering that they could have just slain him and been done with it. The fact that they had not concerned the archdruid. He was not far from where he had been caught in the trap. There was no
sign of the Sentinels, but Malfurion was of the opinion that they had not survived. Only his power had enabled him to keep from death. Malfurion grew furious at the casual loss of two lives. The Sentinels had perished simply because the pair had been caught at the same time as the archdruid. The nearby trees had sought to warn him, but too late. The trap had clearly been a subtle one. Malfurion almost would have sworn that it had been set just for him, or else why would it have been in his path? He regretted now not sending word to Maiev. Something moved at the edge of his vision. A moment later it shifted enough in front of him to be none other than Jarod's sister. Helmet in the crook of her arm, she peered around suspiciously, no doubt seeking Malfurion's captors. He tried to speak, but the pounding returned. Evidently he made some sort of sound, for she looked up at him. "So, finally awake." And with those words, the horrifying truth flashed before the archdruid. Maiev smiled slyly in response to some sign of recognition in his expression. "The great and powerful archdruid Malfurion Stormrage," she announced with deep sarcasm. "The savior of the kaldorei race. . . . " Maiev spit at the ground below him. "More like the destroyer of all that it stands for. . . ." Despite the agony that it caused, Malfurion managed a throaty, "Why?" Her brow cocked. "Now that is, I will admit, impressive. You should have been killed by the trap we set, and here you manage to speak coherently. You are stronger than even I had calculated." Maiev looked to the side. Neva and two other Watchers entered Malfurion's view. They saluted Jarod's sister, not at all a surprise to the prisoner. "All is in readiness," Neva reported. She glanced Malfurion's way. "We should deal with him before it takes place, mistress." "No . . . he is good here. No one from Darnassus will come to this area. Our prey will only do so because they think they are beyond threat even now!" She eyed the archdruid. "No . . . he lives for now. I have decided he deserves a special execution." "Your brother-" Maiev suddenly glared at Neva. "You know his role. You do not touch him. He will speak for us out of belief in me. Keep him ignorant and forgo your desires for now."
Neva silently nodded, for the moment cowed. "The fools will be on their way shortly. You lot better get with the rest." She looked around. "Where is Ja'ara?" "Removing that bit of evidence, as you ordered." Maiev snickered. "Good. With those Sentinels dead and gone, there is no one left who knows we sent for the archdruid here." She glanced Malfurion's way again. "Get on with it. I am just going to make sure the people's hero enjoys his agony a bit more." Neva sneered at Malfurion, then led the other Watchers away. Maiev moved just out of the archdruid's sight. Renewed agony coursed through him. Malfurion tried to scream, but now his mouth would not work at all. As the agony lessened, Jarod's sister returned to his view. She now studied him with utter contempt. "That is better. Silence is golden. Especially from you. I am so very glad you are awake, Archdruid. Neva wanted you dead and out of the way, but I have always felt you really deserve far more than a short, sweet death. You have committed so many crimes against our people. . . ." Although he could not speak, Malfurion tried to relay his thoughts with his eyes. He must have managed, for Maiev shrugged, then answered, "No, I suppose you are blind to everything. Always so caught up in the belief you know best. But if you did, you and Tyrande would not have let those disgusting murderers back among us! There is only one future for the Highborne and it is one you will share!" Maiev drew a dagger from her belt. She eyed it fondly. "You see this? This is special. I saved it for your brother, but never got the chance to use it. It was taken from me before I was tossed into the Warden's Cage in Outland, and I was not able to retrieve it until after his defeat at the Black Temple. I wanted his death to be very slow, so that he would have time to understand why he had to be punished. You and he are twins, all right! Not just by birth, but by arrogance!" She threw the dagger. Malfurion watched it fly toward him and expected his end. Yet, at the very last moment, the dagger veered of its own accord and flew past his head. "Illidan re-creates the Well of Eternity after all the damnation it caused us!
Why? Because he claimed it was for the good of our people! Then he joined the demons, becoming one of them in nature as well as form! Why? Because he again claimed that it was best for our survival to become our enemies and use their own evil against them!" she scoffed. "We know how well that turned out . . . and how false his words always were. . . ." Maiev held her hand to the side. The dagger landed in it, handle first. She studied it again, seeming to find it very fascinating. "We could have been saved so much trouble where your brother was concerned, but you worried about him more than the rest of our race. You set him on us, Archdruid, as sure as if you had unlocked his prison yourself . . . and that is only one of your crimes. . . ." There was no doubt in Malfurion's mind that Maiev was mad and had probably been mad for a long time. Adept throughout her life at surviving, she had been clever enough to hide that fact, acting as she knew Tyrande and he expected of her. "I learned a number of tricks over the millennia, you know. I could not have survived your brother's tender mercies if I had not." Her eyes grew hollow for a moment as she dwelled in dark memories. "Picked up a few gifts like this dagger and learned some abilities necessary to trap demons . . . and Highborne. I have sacrificed so much, but it will all be worth it. I realized that this was the day I was working for, cleansing our people of the Highborne's taint once and for all and removing your foul influence at the same time. . . ." She replaced the dagger, then simply stared at her prisoner for several seconds. To Malfurion, it was almost as if Maiev no longer saw him, no longer believed he existed. Jarod's sister started talking again, only now her tone was more friendly. "I have to leave you now, Malfurion. I have guests I must attend to. Archmage Mordent and his associates are dying to know why I have asked them to come, and I do not want to disappoint them. . . ." Malfurion tried to keep her attention, if only for the sake of the Highborne. He knew that her intentions for the spellcasters were of the lethal kind. "Do not fret," she jested. "When I am done with them, I will give you my personal attention. I promise, you will not feel slighted. I have chosen a special place where you will be jailed for your crimes just as your brother was." Maiev's tone grew even more contemptuous. "A cozy place where, since you saw so fit
to make us mortal, you can gradually rot to death. . . ." That said, Maiev performed a mock bow, then departed. Malfurion waited, but she did not reappear in his line of sight. He was definitely alone. Throughout the entire time, the archdruid had been trying to find some weakness of which he could make use, but Maiev's trap was thorough. Yet, he kept trying. He had no choice. It was very clear that Maiev fully intended to slaughter Mordent and several others. The other assassinations had been but tests and taunts. Now she had the confidence that she would be able to take on the leadership of the Highborne. The pain and throbbing returned as he struggled, but Malfurion tried to ignore everything but his escape attempt. Maiev might be utterly mad, but the archdruid knew her determination, knew her adaptability. She would not seek to slay the spellcasters unless she felt certain she could succeed. If she felt so, then nothing-absolutely nothing-would stand in her way. After all, in her mind, she was only doing her duty for the sake of her people.
Jarod stopped by the Temple of Elune in search of Malfurion, but the archdruid was not there. With Tyrande surely in Ashenvale by now, the former guard captain had expected to find her mate in the vicinity of the Sisters of Elune, who were most likely to be able to tell the archdruid something of the high priestess's current circumstances.
Questioning the attendants on duty availed him nothing. They had not seen Malfurion since the day before. One suggested that Jarod seek him in the Cenarion Enclave, and with nowhere else to turn, the night elf had gone there. However, the druids he met there were equally unhelpful. Their leader often stepped off on his own to commune with the forest. Without any concrete reason to have them search for Malfurion, Jarod had to be satisfied with their assurances that the moment they heard from the archdruid they would alert him to the former officer's desire to meet. Jarod knew that he should just be patient and wait for Malfurion to return from wherever he was, but the same instincts that had saved him during the war and that had recently stirred again now made him suspicious of this timely absence. It was possible that someone had distracted the archdruid when he might most be needed. However, with no proof, it was up to him alone to find out if that was true.
Jarod decided to seek Eadrik in the hopes that the Gilnean would either know where Malfurion was or even help the former guard captain locate the archdruid. Eadrik shared Jarod's concerns on matters such as the murders, and that was why the night elf thought that the worgen might assist him. Wary of running afoul of another trap left by the assassins, Jarod veered far more south. He knew the territory well enough by now to know that there was a fair path along there that would lead him to the Gilneans. In addition, Jarod hoped to run into one of those who dealt with Darnassus in the name of their king. Such an encounter might lead to a much quicker answer and save him an unnecessary trek. But even well on his way to their encampment, the former guard captain saw no sign of any of the cursed humans. That was a bit unusual, according to what he had learned from others. Generally, there should have at least been one or two of the worgen traveling to and from the capital on official duty. As he neared the encampment, Jarod noticed one other odd fact. True, the worgen were silent in the forest, but he should have heard some sound of activity. It was as if they were all asleep . . . or gone. But no sooner had he thought that than Jarod sensed he was no longer alone. Impatient with matters, he simply stopped and waited. As the night elf hoped, a worgen slipped out from among the trees. In fact, it was the very worgen for whom he had been looking. "Eadrik. Good! I wanted to talk with-" The worgen signaled him to silence. Jarod obeyed instantly. From farther back along Jarod's path, there came a muffled gasp, followed by a grunt. Eadrik leapt past the night elf, who turned to join him. Someone had been tracking Jarod. The night elf realized that he had not even noticed. Whoever it was had been very well trained in moving stealthily. His mind went to the assassins. If they could murder Highborne, how easy it must have been to simply follow a fool like Jarod. His skill had evidently rusted greatly, after all. Barely had he begun trailing Eadrik than he almost collided with the worgen, who stood stiffly, staring at something a little farther down the trail. It was another worgen . . . minus his head. Even in death, he still retained his lupine form, something that Jarod had not expected. The killer was someone of high skill, indeed. Jarod could see how cleanly the
head had been severed. What made that more astounding was that the evidence he saw indicated that the worgen had been facing his slayer. "I warned Samuel not to take this lightly! I warned him that they were dangerous even to us!" "Who?" Eadrik did not answer. With a growl, the worgen lunged ahead, on the path of whoever had killed his companion. Utterly baffled at this turn, Jarod had no other recourse but to keep up. That immediately proved difficult, for the worgen dropped down on all fours, increasing his speed dramatically. The worgen sniffed the air as he ran, following the scent. The pair quickly left the vicinity of the encampment and, shortly after that, even the most remote part of Darnassus. The deep forest beckoned ominously, but neither slowed even though Jarod had a bad feeling about where things were heading. Eadrik came to a halt, the worgen rising and lifting his snout to the sky. He inhaled deeply, then bared his teeth and growled low. Jarod, who could see nothing around them but the trees, wondered what the Gilnean was up to now. "Can't have lost them," Eadrik muttered. "The scent was there. . . ." Jarod smelled something. A flowery scent. It should have been nothing out of the ordinary, but to him it somehow seemed out of place. Eadrik did not note it so. His mind was on other matters. "I shouldn't even be here. . . . I should've left this to you night elves! The king wanted all of us able fighters to go with him except for a handful to stay with the young and ill! I was to go with, but I begged him to let me stay! Why did I do it? It's your problem, not ours . . . but the archdruid's tried to do so much for us; I couldn't leave it. . . ." "What are you talking about?" Jarod asked, distracted by the worgen's mutterings. His companion stared at him. The eyes seemed too gentle for the otherwise bestial appearance . . . gentle, but not weak. Eadrik was still a human beneath the surface. "Never mind that! These assassinations! They happened too near us for my tastes! My lord ordered all of us to leave the matter be, but I couldn't. I investigated. I found out the truth, but I didn't think anyone would believe me! That's why I stayed! I couldn't leave it-" He got no further. Suddenly there came the cracking of a tree branch from deeper in the forest.
Something flew their direction. "Get down!" Jarod shouted, bowling into the worgen. Eadrik let out a startled growl and fell with him. The glaive cut through the branches just behind where the worgen had stood, then arced. With sinister grace, it darted back the way it had come. Eadrik shoved Jarod aside. "Stay down, night elf! This hunt is mine!" Jarod tried to call him back, but the Gilnean was confident in his abilities. The worgen jumped among the trees even as another glaive soared past him. The former guard captain seized a heavy rock and threw. The rock struck the glaive squarely, sending it off angle. The deadly weapon flew into a tree, cutting a deep gash. The glaive then bounded off the trunk and fell to the ground a short distance away. Scrambling forward, Jarod recovered the weapon. He was not very proficient with the glaive, preferring a sword. The night elf cursed himself not only for lacking that training, but also for leaving his favored blade behind. Gripping the glaive as best he could, Jarod crouched low, then followed after Eadrik. He did not see the worgen immediately but knew roughly where the Gilnean would have gone. Jarod's body ached as he pushed through the thick brush, but he fought to ignore it. There was always time for aches later, providing that he survived. He burst through a wall of greenery-and only barely managed to grab a branch before he would have hurtled to his death. The ground dropped nearly a hundred feet. As he pulled himself back to safety, Jarod momentarily pondered the amazing landscape that existed atop the World Tree and how much effort the druids and others must have put in to create a realm that mimicked mainland Azeroth. Sounds of a struggle brought him back to the moment. He heard Eadrik's growl and a grunt from someone else. There was a crash. Glaive held ready, Jarod followed the noise. The struggle had to be very close- A curved blade barely missed his throat. Only a last-minute glint noticed out of the corner of his eye enabled Jarod to get his own stolen weapon up in time. However, unlike the previous blade, the one that came at him now had not been tossed. Rather, it was wielded in the expert hand of whom at first Jarod thought a Sentinel-until he saw the face.
Neva grinned as she slashed again with her umbra crescent. There was madness in her eyes, but a madness with much cunning. She pressed him against a tree and forced his blades back. "Is this not romantic?" she mocked, steering the crescent closer to his neck. "Just you and me. . . ." "Where is . . . Eadrik?" "The mutt? I have left him for skinning later! Make a nice cloak. . . . " Anger filled him upon hearing of the brave worgen's death. He had been afraid that the Gilnean had, despite his own warnings to his countryman, underestimated those shadowing Jarod. The last was something that still puzzled Jarod too. Why had he been followed in the first place? Had Neva been concerned that he might know something and was about to warn Maiev? Maiev . . . Jarod cursed as it all made sense to him. Neva's grin grew wider, more mocking. "Figured it out, did you? You are not just pretty but smart too! Your sister is going to cleanse our people of all their taint! No Highborne, no mutts, no humans . . . no Alliance! We need nothing from them, and all they do is bring their foul ways to us!" She was insane if she believed what she said, and if she did indeed serve Maiev in this "cleansing," then Jarod's sister was even madder. He could see how it might have come about. Her entire existence had consisted of preserving the night elf race in one way or another. The Highborne's return must have been the breaking point. It was as if Zin-Azshari had once more claimed dominion over their people. The crescent edged nearer to his throat. Neva was strong, and although she might not be as much as Jarod, she also had leverage on her side. "Why . . . does she want . . . me dead?" he rasped. "Maiev does not! She thinks you are useful as a puppet! But I have been watching! You are more dangerous than she thinks! She will appreciate why I killed you. She knows that I believe!" Jarod saw no point in trying to talk her out of her murderous ways. Neva was a fanatic who saw him only as an impediment. From behind Neva there erupted a dark form. Daring to look beyond his
attacker, Jarod saw Eadrik, his coat matted with both his own blood and surely that of others, fall upon Maiev's second. But Neva was very skilled herself. She pulled her crescent from Jarod and twisted it around just in time to gut the oncoming worgen. Unfortunately for Neva, that left her open to Jarod. Too late to save his rescuer, he managed to avenge him. The stolen glaive cut deep into the back of her neck. Neva spun, then fell to her side. Her foot missed the ground and she started over the edge. Even then, though, her obsession remained with her and she grabbed Jarod by the arm, intending to bring him with her. A set of claws ripped through the wrist of the hand clutching Jarod. Hacking and coughing, Eadrik shoved into Neva as she lost her grip. Tangled, the pair fell to the ground far below. The thud shook Jarod to the heart. The night elf peered down. The two bodies lay separate now, Eadrik on his stomach and almost looking asleep rather than dead, and Neva- Neva moved. Barely. There was no chance that she could recover, not this far from any priestess or druid, but the assassin was not yet dead. Jarod suddenly prayed that she would hold on. Struggling with his own injuries, he scrambled down to the two as quickly as he could. He who had seen so much death on the battlefield had no trouble assuring himself that the worgen was dead. Neva moaned. Jarod knelt down beside her just as she managed to open one eye. "C-come to kiss me good-bye?" she whispered, smirking. "No. I have come to watch you die slowly, painfully. I have seen injuries like yours. You will survive for several hours, maybe a day or two. I will be gone before then. You will die alone, unless some animal comes to gnaw on you while you are still fresh." The smirk vanished. Neva looked uncertain, off balance. "Kill me. Y-you know . . . you know you want . . . to." "I have no reason to grant you any peace. You killed my friend and his friend. . . ." Neva laughed, which sent blood out of the side of her mouth. "The worgen . . . better than I thought. Must have killed Tas'ira after . . . after we both thought
we killed him." Hearing that there had been another enemy nearby, Jarod quickly looked around, but saw nothing. This made Neva's grin widen. . . and look even more deathly. "N-never fear. Had . . . had she been around, you . . . you would not be alive! She was with me. . . . " The Watcher suddenly shook. "Ungh! By Elune . . . kill me!" Jarod did not move. "Tell me where my sister is and I will end your suffering." "You . . . you will never reach her in . . . in time!" Neva said the last with some pleasure despite her pain. "I will if you answer me quickly. In return, I swear that I will do what I can for you." She glared at him. "I will not . . . tell you." He reached to his belt, where a knife hung. Jarod slowly removed the short but sharp blade. "I will end the suffering. It will only get worse. I know. I saw it on the fields so many times. Good, strong warriors-stronger than you or me- screaming from the pain of their wounds and their shattered insides. The worst ones were those I could not reach because of the Burning Legion so near. They lived for days." He looked off, remembering. "I cannot think of how many I had to send off because there was not any chance of a healer of any sort even easing their conditions." Neva managed to look away, although she groaned with each forced movement. Her neck was not broken, but Jarod knew that was little comfort to her. The rest of her body was mangled. He reluctantly sheathed the knife, then rose. That caught her attention. "You cannot-" "I am wasting my time here. I will find Maiev one way or another-" "Wait!" The injured assassin gritted her teeth, then gasped, "Maiev is- Maiev is going to kill the Highborne. First . . . first their leaders . . . then the rest." The news did not entirely shock him, not from what he had already witnessed. "That I know. Farewell, Neva. . . ." "Wait!" She coughed and more blood came up. "W-wait. Your sister . . . your sister has another surprise. I . . . I will not let you save the damned spellcasters . . . but I . . . I will give you the archdruid. . . ."
He could not hide the effect this revelation had upon him. Jarod returned to Neva's side. "Malfurion? What has happened to him? Where is he?" She glared. "First . . . your . . . your word. I know you, Shadowsong. Maiev says . . . says you always kept your word . . . just like a good boy. Tell me . . . tell me you will kill me and I will give you the archdruid. . . . " Another cough. More blood. "Will not matter as much . . . if the Highborne die. He will be disgraced. . . ." Maiev has Malfurion. . . . The awful thought kept racing through Jarod's mind. He could not trust that his sister might not be ready to kill the archdruid at any moment. Time was of the essence. "You have my word. I will take the pain away." She looked relieved, and extremely pale. As best she could, she told him the path he should take. Jarod, as a soldier well-versed in communicating with the dying, could tell that she did not lie. There were some gaps in her description, but he knew enough, he thought. "You . . . you promised," she pressed after she was done. "I know," Jarod answered, drawing the blade. Neva studied the knife, then turned her gaze skyward. "You will . . . be too late to stop her," Neva rasped. "Too late . . ." He said nothing, using the knife expertly to keep his oath. The deed done, Jarod Shadowsong stood. Even though Neva had been an enemy, he regretted that he had let her suffer for as long as he had. That was not his way. However, Jarod had needed to know what his sister intended and where it would take place. And while Neva had not given him everything, she had offered one item that, frankly, was much more important to him than the lives of all the Highborne combined . . . Malfurion's whereabouts. Nothing mattered more than rescuing the archdruid. Jarod leaned over Eadrik. With his finger, he drew a crescent moon in the air over the worgen's body. The sign of Elune. He prayed that the Mother Moon would take Eadrik's spirit to wherever the worgen's kind should go after death. Eadrik had proven himself as good a comrade as any Jarod had fought beside in the war. The members of the Alliance were fools if they did not see what having such beings on their side could mean. It might even be able to swing the advantage away from the Horde, who thus far seemed better suited to the wild world Azeroth had become.
The night elf headed off at as great a pace as he could. However, only then did he recall that he had forgotten to make certain from Neva that there were no more traps between Malfurion and him. It would take only one misstep to end the archdruid's rescue before it began. And this time, there would be no one to save Jarod, either.
24
ASHENVALE AT WAR
As Jarod had begun his day in search of Malfurion, events quickened in Ashenvale. With Elune's guidance, Tyrande had worked miracles in the form of moon-affected currents to see to it that the ships reached Ashenvale even more quickly than estimated. Shandris had immediately sent heralds to the outposts to alert them of their coming and, in turn, learn where matters stood. As this went on, the newly arrived force wasted no time in moving out and marching. During the march, Tyrande explained to those priestesses who had accompanied her as to what their roles would be and what risks they would have to take. Thus it was that Haldrissa and her Sentinels had the great pleasure-and relief-of watching the reinforcements arrive the next day, and they instantly began melding with the defenders already at the river. With Denea and the rest of her staff at her side, Haldrissa quickly rode up to meet the arrival of the high priestess and general. Tyrande Whisperwind was an arresting sight. She did not wear the soft, shimmering robes of the temple now but rather the armor of a warrior of the moon goddess. Her formfitting armor, which covered her from neck to foot, had been crafted with layered plates that allowed her ease of movement. A gossamer cloak the color of moonlight and attached at the shoulders fluttered in the breeze. The high priestess also wore a winged helmet that covered the top half of her head. "Hail, Commander Haldrissa," Tyrande said without preamble. "I give thanks to the Mother Moon that we find you holding here." "The Horde has made no sign of movement since Silverwing fell. . . ."
Their expressions turned more dour at her answer. Tyrande and Shandris had been informed of the outpost's destruction the moment that they had arrived, but it was still a bitter pill to swallow. For a long time Silverwing had been admired as an example of night elf determination in the face of extreme adversity. "The damned orcs will pay," Shandris remarked with relish. "Whatever tricks they have been using are not going to help them anymore!" "Let us temper our desire to avenge the brave defenders of Silverwing and elsewhere in Ashenvale with the knowledge that Garrosh Hellscream commands the Horde now, not Thrall," said Tyrande. "This is a different Horde in many respects, Shandris. We must move with thought and caution." "Oh, we will. We will move with the thought of crushing the orcs and the caution of not getting their blood in our eyes when we cut them down." The high priestess's brow arched. Haldrissa said nothing, but Denea and most of the other Sentinels present nodded hearty agreement with the general. "We need to know all that has transpired," Tyrande told the commander, "and where you think your weakest points in the line might be." Haldrissa wasted no time in explaining all as best she could. A daring Denea tossed in her own suggestions when there seemed a point of hesitation on the senior officer's part, including the belief that a thrust forward now would enable them to push the Horde back even to Silverwing. Haldrissa did not silence her second, a part of her wondering if Denea had a sharper grasp than her at the moment. Not once did the younger Sentinel pause in uncertainty as she did, and all that Denea suggested sounded reasonable to her. Shandris and the high priestess took in everything, but voiced no opinion until the pair was done. At that point Tyrande Whisperwind looked to her general. "What say you?" "It sounds as if the line is well set up. The thrust forward might be wise; one should never keep on the defensive with the Horde. I will have scouts set out immediately while we distribute our own forces along the perimeter Commander Haldrissa has established. The river is a good point of defense in case we have to pull back for one reason or another. We will leave a row of archers to give cover fire in case of that." "The goblin mist," Haldrissa reminded her. "No mist, natural or otherwise, will obscure our sight this time," the high
priestess promised. "Elune will see to that." The commander visibly exhaled. Suddenly, she felt very exhausted. Tyrande looked upon her with sympathy, focusing for one moment on the eye patch. "You have served me well over the millennia, Haldrissa . . . and sacrificed much too. Now serve me by getting some well-deserved rest." "I know how the commander has laid out everything," Denea offered before Haldrissa could turn down the gracious suggestion. "She can rest easy knowing all will be well." "It is settled, then." The high priestess's gaze met the commander's. In those eyes, Haldrissa saw nothing but respect and compassion. Tyrande truly believed Haldrissa needed sleep, and who was she to argue with the co-ruler of all night elves? "As you wish." Tyrande corrected her. "As you must, Haldrissa. We will need your experience badly. You know Ashenvale better than most." "Thank you, High Priestess." From many others, the veteran warrior might have taken the comments as simple assuaging of any hurt feelings on Haldrissa's part, but from Tyrande the commander knew that they were honest. That made her feel better as she excused herself and headed toward where she had made her camp. As she retired, she kept her glaive nearby. It was very relieving to have the high priestess and the general in control of things, but Haldrissa had indeed been stationed in Ashenvale much longer than nearly anyone else here. She was more at home in the forests of this land than she would have been back in Darnassus. She felt attuned to Ashenvale, and when it suffered, it was as if a part of her did also. And as she shut her eye, she could not help feeling that, despite the presence of the high priestess, much more terrible suffering was meant for Haldrissa's beloved Ashenvale. . . .
Tyrande missed Haldrissa's presence almost immediately, but gave no hint. Other than Shandris, the rest of the officers were much, much younger than her. Several had grown up only knowing the War of the Ancients as some epic tale of their parents. They could appreciate the obvious repercussions it had created and understood such matters as why most people hated the Highborne, but they still did not understand just how much the high priestess felt as if she
were suffering from déjà vu. Here she was again, having to defend a world turned upside down by the evil of a creature who thought itself the ultimate judge. Back then it had been Queen Azshara. Now, it was Deathwing the Destroyer. And because of both of them, the night elves were faced with daunting obstacles to their continued survival.
But although instead of demons she faced the Horde, Tyrande found no solace in that. Blood was blood; death was death. I am growing old, she mused, then quickly buried the thought. Instead she looked into herself and reached for Elune's comforting blessing. Although she herself did not notice it, the shaft of soft, pale light that often shone down on her when she looked to the Mother Moon for guidance reappeared. Only when several Sentinels went down on one knee did she realize it. "Rise, please." Tyrande did not like her mere presence as Elune's vessel to cause one disruption after another. While in general she had been successful at lessening the kneeling, moments like this frustrated her. Neither she nor the lunar goddess sought adulation . . . although, admittedly, even she happily revered Elune. Tyrande just did not believe that she also deserved reverence; she was only the Mother Moon's servant. Shandris was off organizing the troops with the assistance of the ambitious young Denea and several other officers both from Ashenvale and Darnassus. The Sentinel lines had already been shored up. One welcome addition to the army gathering in defense of Ashenvale was a ship of mixed forces that had unexpectedly been offered to Tyrande just before departure. With Theramore's suggestion, members of the escort of each representative had been offered the chance to volunteer to help. So many had joined that the ship had been packed tight. In addition to Jaina Proudmoore's people, all three dwarven clans-including the Wildhammers and a number of their gryphons-the gnomes, the draenei, and other humans stood ready to fight alongside the night elves. She peered beyond the river, beyond the forest edge on the other side. In the distance, mist gathered over the area. It had begun coalescing almost exactly the moment that the force under her overall command had arrived, as if the Horde had been awaiting her arrival. Elune, guide us, she prayed. The high priestess surveyed the warriors making
up the front. They all had that earnest, wary look she recalled too well from the many wars in which she had fought. A warning horn sounded. Tyrande searched for the source, but instead found Shandris riding toward her, Ash'alah, the high priestess's own cat, racing alongside. "Mount!" Shandris called as she pulled up. "Mount quickly!" "What is it?" Shandris pointed to the east. As if a silent but raging river, the goblin mist surged forward. Gigantic trees vanished as the thick fog enveloped them. Within the short moment that Tyrande had watched it, the mist had nearly reached the river. She leapt aboard her nightsaber just as another horn blew from the southeast. It did not surprise either of them to see that the mist now rushed forth there also. A shout from ahead signaled the mist's advance there, also. Tyrande marveled at the mechanisms the goblins must have put together to create this fog. As the wind shifted briefly, she also smelled the stench that Ashenvale's defenders had reported. The fog was more of a huge patch of smoke, as if the forest were on fire somewhere. "You would do better farther back," Shandris suggested. "I did not come here to hide behind everyone else. I am here because I am needed, Shandris . . . especially at this moment." Tyrande raised her hands toward the sky. Even though the moon was not evident now, the beam of silver light shone down brighter upon her. Tyrande focused her mind entirely on her prayer. She asked much of Elune but believed that the deity expected what she intended and would grant it. Shandris gasped, then recovered. Other Sentinels looked her way, but the general angrily waved them back to their watch. A beam of moonlight shone down upon Tyrande. The high priestess glowed brighter than the day. The glow grew, first spreading before her, then expanding to her left and right. The light of Elune draped across the Alliance lines, confronting the encroaching goblin mist wherever it was. The foul-smelling fog moved above the river first, reaching the midway point. But then the moonlight met it. Tyrande stared straight ahead. As the power of Elune neared the mist, she
felt the other priestesses who had come with the expedition finally join her efforts. Strengthened by their prayers, Tyrande's plan thrust ahead. As she had done against the evil of the Nightmare Lord, the high priestess let the light of the Mother Moon burn away the goblins' creation. Compared to the Nightmare's monstrous fog and its frightening shadows, the Horde's mist proved a weak foe. The moonlight ate away at it with no difficulty and within seconds had already cleansed the air above the river. The defenders cheered. Those cheers grew even stronger as Elune revealed anew the forest beyond. The goblin mist faded as if nothing. That did not mean that its creators did not try to fight back. Ahead of the light, the fog abruptly thickened. Yet, even then it proved no match for the Mother Moon's gentle illumination. The light pushed on, moving even after there was no visible sign of the mist left to the Sentinels and their allies. Although she could not see what happened so far away, Tyrande sensed a sudden ceasing of the goblins' fog. Why waste such effort when it was to no avail? She should have felt confidence with this first, very obvious victory, but the high priestess could not shake the feeling that there was something amiss. Next to her, Shandris screamed something unintelligible. The next moment the world around Tyrande exploded. What sounded like a roar accompanied the eruption, and her first thought was, Deathwing! Deathwing comes to fight for the Horde! Even as she tumbled, a part of her knew that the thought was a foolish one. The huge dragon would not have bothered with such a petty spectacle. Deathwing, who abhorred all "lesser" life, would have preferred razing the entire area, combatants and all. Her concentration broken, the prayer ended, and with it the light. She felt pain in her left arm and leg. When Tyrande tried to see what was happening, at first all she saw was more fog. No . . . not fog. Dust. The air was filled with dust and even large fragments of rock and earth that rained down on not just her, but everyone else in the area. Tyrande made out at least three Sentinels nearby who lay either dead or unconscious. A large, moist nose sniffed her. Tyrande's nightsaber licked her leg, where for the first time the high priestess saw that a shard of rock stuck out near the thigh. Wincing, she seized the shard and tugged it free, then quickly prayed over
the wound. The gap healed, leaving only bloodstains to mark it. Touching her arm, Tyrande only found some blood. No longer concerned for herself, she looked for Shandris. The first sign of the other night elf was one that made Tyrande shiver with anguish. Shandris's nightsaber lay sprawled, its skull crushed in by a very large piece of rock. "Shandris!" All else forgotten, Tyrande stepped past her mount and climbed over the dead cat. "Shandris!" There were two individuals in her life who meant more to her than anything. Malfurion and the orphan who had become her daughter. Tyrande had never let Shandris know just how much she worried about the younger night elf's duties as head of their forces. So many of the high priestess's personal prayers had concerned Shandris's continued safety. And now . . . There was no sign of Shandris on the other side. Tyrande looked farther on, fearing that her daughter had been thrown far away. Tyrande spotted another body-a Sentinel, surely dead, from the awkward angle in which she lay-but it was not Shandris. Even though she felt some shame in doing so, the high priestess gave thanks to Elune for even this momentary respite. Then a groan from the direction of the dead nightsaber made her turn. Tyrande rushed to the area by the tail, a place to which she had paid little mind. There, a good portion of the cat was buried under the rubble of whatever had struck. Shandris's arm, the covering dust making it blend into the ground around it, lay just under one of the feline's hind legs. It moved as Tyrande neared, and again she gave thanks to Elune for this personal blessing. No sooner had she knelt to see what she could do than several other Sentinels rushed up to help. They had evidently seen what had happened but could not get to the two any sooner. With careful swiftness they hefted the dead nightsaber off of the general. Tyrande put a hand to Shandris's back and prayed. She did not know what injuries Shandris had suffered and did not care. She only hoped that Elune would heal whatever had happened to her daughter. Shandris groaned again, but this time with more life. She glowed with the light of Elune as Tyrande finished her prayer. Only when the high priestess
pulled her hand away did the glow fade. To Tyrande's relief, Shandris's breathing was strong and regular. As the high priestess pulled back, it was as if the world had suddenly returned in all its chaotic fury. There were shouts coming from everywhere and the familiar hiss of arrows on their way to deliver death. She hoped the last sound had come from the bows of the Sentinels and not the Horde, but knew that it was likely a combination of both. Sentinels rushed past her, some mounted, and all of them with anxious looks on their faces. A roar that reminded her of Deathwing thundered across the area. Belatedly, Tyrande recognized that it was not one roar but a multitude of voices shouting in unison. She looked toward the river . . . and saw that beyond it, the forest was filled with orcs, tauren with massive totems, trolls-including more than one witch doctor-and more. The floodgates had opened and through them rushed the Horde. "They . . . they were seeking you," Shandris gasped as a pair of the Sentinels helped her rise. "They knew you were here and they used the damned mist to make you act!" Tyrande peered at the area around them. Virtually all of the huge boulders that had dropped among them had been concentrated on the center, where, indeed, she had been situated. The high priestess suspected that she could thank luck as much as her patron for the fact that she had survived. Actually, she could thank one more. "You threw yourself at me." "With all due respect, you are more important to our people than I am," Shandris responded, straightening. "I did not know that I would land just where my mount would fall after the next strike!" The horns sounded again. Another flight of arrows from the Alliance side flew over the river. The Horde forces held up their shields, creating a wall. Most of the arrows either bounced off the shields or stuck in them, but several still caught their intended targets. A number of warriors fell or pulled back with bolts sticking out of them. "They have not managed to ford the river yet," Tyrande noticed. "It is deep and the current is strong, but that should still not be such a problem for them. They are testing us out; I know it!" Denea rode up. "General, they did much the same when they attacked our
main outpost! The commander thought that they were counting our archers!" "Likely enough! It will do them no good. We have got far more than we are using. The others will be a nice surprise when they think they have got our numbers down!" As the Alliance archers continued to fire-and the orcs on occasion fired back -more mounted Sentinels readied along various points of the line. Tyrande and Shandris had come to Ashenvale with a battle plan already in mind that did not need to wait for whatever the Horde intended to throw at them. Four contingents of huntresses armed with lances now kept their mounts ready for the signal. With them stood double their number of Sentinels on foot, both those with glaives and others with swords. Accompanying them were dwarves of the Dark Iron and Bronzebeard clans, while farther back, Wildhammer dwarves waited for word to urge their gryphons skyward. Humans, draenei, and gnomes-the last armed with some especially vicious devices-intermingled with the first two dwarven clans. A few magi, mostly from Theramore, were also in attendance, their focus on their dark counterparts. Tyrande's priestesses had separated into two groups. One went about healing the wounded, while the second watched Tyrande expectantly. They were to assist in her own attack. Another unit consisting of defenders from Ashenvale formed a new center. Denea had volunteered to take command of them in place of Haldrissa, and Shandris had agreed to that. The general gave the younger Sentinel some lastminute instructions, then sent her off to her soldiers. Shandris turned to Tyrande. "Are you ready? Can you take over?" The devastation around the high priestess still fresh in her mind-and especially the deaths of those who had paid for being in the vicinity of her- Tyrande flatly replied, "Be ready." With a crooked grin, Shandris secured another mount from one of the other Sentinels, then rode off. Tyrande of necessity led her own cat farther to the rear. Although she ached to join Shandris in battle, for this, she had to be in a safer position. Only when her task was accomplished could she enter the fray herself. The apparent impasse held. Making certain that the assigned priestesses were ready, Tyrande waited for the right moment. A horn blew from where Shandris commanded.
The Alliance archers ceased firing. The orcs forming the first ranks roared, then charged toward the river. Tauren and trolls followed them, while in the back, the undead warlocks of the Forsaken and witch doctors from the trolls began casting spells that Tyrande hoped her own side would be able to counter with minimal losses. Arrows flew toward the Alliance's own front ranks, where huntresses, lances ready, were forced to crouch behind shields and barriers. In concert with the other priestesses, Tyrande prayed to Elune. Moonlight touched her and her followers. It then reached forth beyond the defenders' lines, stretching across the river. However, where before it had simply glowed everywhere in order to dissolve the false mist, now its light focused as if through a diamond. And even moonlight in the eyes can blind. The front ranks of the Horde were caught in their tracks. The hulking warriors stumbled. Whether orc, tauren, or some other powerful fighter, there was nothing they could do. The light caught them by surprise. It dazzled their gazes. Several orcs ran into one another, their positions made worse by the fact that they were half in the water. Now, Shandris! Tyrande silently called. Now! The blare of a new horn heartened her, as did the battle cry of the rushing Sentinels and the deadly hiss of the protecting archers. Into the river raced the lancers, their nightsabers undaunted by the water or the enemy ahead. Shandris had utilized the knowledge of Ashenvale's defenders to know where the shallowest areas were, aiding the momentum of the charge. From the other side, there came the bleat of a horn. Still blinded, the Horde fighters shuffled back as best they could. They will be slaughtered, Tyrande thought with some guilt. She knew that she did the right thing, but still she also prayed that perhaps the enemy would see fit to either keep running or wisely surrender. The first of the lancers reached the other side, the crumbling lines of the orcs and their allies only a few yards ahead now. The expert aim of Sentinel archers downed several brutish warriors who refused to retreat with the rest. Orcs, by far the bulk of Garrosh's expedition, lay strewn everywhere, their fearsome tusked faces often still seeming angry in death. Some had more than half a dozen bolts sticking out of their thick hides and even more stuck in their armor
and shields. The orcs had done their best to protect themselves, but against so many arrows, even the best of armor proved inadequate. Yet, even despite the deadly downpour, several orcs-arrows deep in legs, arms, and torso-survived to keep some order as they dragged more severely wounded comrades back from danger. Two grabbed banners from fallen comrades, waving the Horde flags in defiance as the Sentinels moved in after them. Despite the surviving orcs' bravado, it appeared that the destruction of Silverwing would soon be avenged. However, of even greater import was the growing hope that the liberation of all Ashenvale seemed possible . . . if Garrosh's ambition could be crushed here and now. Again, the enemy horn sounded . . . yet, this time in a more fearsome, defiant manner. Tyrande had to assume that Garrosh intended a stand on safer ground. The only trouble was, the moonlight followed the Horde, continuing to blind them even as the lancers drew within striking range. The warlocks and other casters could not even give proper cover, as they were also unable to face the moonlight. That, in turn, gave more advantage to the Alliance spellcasters, who worked in earnest to put an end to the Horde's magical threat. Fearsome blasts bombarded the warlocks nearest to the front. The Horde horn blared once more, its signal not at all seeming to call for retreat. Rather, it encouraged attack in its tone, promised victory. But instead of turning to face their foes again, the orcs and other fighters remaining from the front lines did a strange thing. They scattered to the trees as if trying to get out of the way. How they hoped to escape the nightsabers by fleeing, she could not say. Night elves were more forest creatures than orcs, tauren, or even trolls. Their cats were just as wily and quick in such areas, and the riders knew well how to handle their lances even among the trees. Shandris must have suspected something, for a horn sounded on the Alliance side, one that signaled for a regrouping rather than a continued hunt through forest. With so many of the enemy now turned from the direction of the battle, the high priestess finally chose to cease the prayer. Even as the moonlight faded, she urged her mount forward. If there was danger to her people-and to her Shandris-Tyrande needed to be nearby. The first wave of foot soldiers had made it to the other side behind the lancers. Some threw their glaives at retreating targets, but most already began
regrouping. Watching them, Tyrande breathed with relief. Garrosh would find the advance line able to hold against his warriors. A monstrous roar rumbled through the region. A massive rock appeared in the sky, then dropped down hard on a band of lancers just about to join their compatriots. The hapless riders never even realized their doom. The rock crushed some, and the fragments from its shattering slew the others. More rocks came flying through the air. Ashenvale's defenders had warned about hidden catapults, but Tyrande had never witnessed anything like this. There was something different. She was reminded of her own near death and how that assault, too, had seemed not quite what it appeared. The first rock had done the most harm. Now warned, the Alliance army better avoided the areas where the missiles dropped. Trees began shaking farther into the forest ahead. Another roar thundered across the landscape . . . and this time was answered by several more, all from the same direction. What seemed initially a series of rhythmic explosions accented the roars. Tyrande frowned. Not explosions. It was as if they were hoofbeats-but for such, the animals would have to be gigantic. . . . The tree line flew away, entire oaks tossed as if nothing. A humongous shape, with some resemblance in outline to a centaur but much bulkier, burst out among the stunned defenders. "Elune, preserve us!" the high priestess blurted. The giant creature seized a lancer and mount with one hand and tossed both casually over his shoulder. Night elf and cat went screaming to their deaths. The behemoth stomped at the closest Sentinels on foot, crushing one beneath his sturdy, elephantine feet. Indeed, the lower half of the body had much similarity to such a creature- or rather, to its larger, more deadly cousin from Northrend, the mammoth. Yet, where the head and shoulders should have begun, the upper torso of another fantastic creature roughly akin to a human began. The towering monster, two long tusks arching down from the sides of his mouth, eagerly searched the ground before him for more victims. And as the one behemoth stomped among the scattering defenders, another broke through the forest elsewhere, sending trees down on the fighters and
seizing other victims in his thick, four-fingered hands. As the second monster crushed the life out of his prey, the rest of the trees exploded and identical fiends fell upon the would-be victors. The battle had turned into a catastrophe of proportions as terrible as the legendary creatures loose among the tiny night elves. They have set magnataur upon us! the high priestess marveled grimly. They have dared set magnataur loose in Ashenvale! The danger to the Horde itself surely should have been obvious to Garrosh, but he had taken the risk and thus far had chosen well. To bring the savage giants of the wastes of Northrend to Ashenvale had surely been a mighty test in itself. Tyrande could not imagine how even the Horde could have managed to bring them without some sacrifice already on its part. With heavy thumps, the magnataur wreaked havoc merely by moving. Tyrande counted eight in all-every one of them bulls-and though a small number, it was astonishing to see them together. So violent were magnataur that males such as these lived isolated from one another, or else they constantly came to blows. The beasts crushed and tossed about their victims as if the mighty Alliance army was little more than ants. A nightsaber lacking its rider attempted to bite at the heavy, cylindrical leg of one of the magnataur. For its bravery, the cat was taken up in one hand, then torn apart with both. The magnataur then threw the mangled pieces into the river, which already ran red with blood. Somewhere out there, Tyrande knew Shandris was trying her best to save her troops. The high priestess yearned to continue her own charge, but knew that she had to try to stop the magnataur first. Reining her cat to a halt, she called upon Elune's aid in that regard. As it always did, the light of the Mother Moon shone down upon her. Tyrande prayed for guidance- Yet another huge boulder soared above her. Too late, Tyrande realized that the magnataur were the "catapults," and for them Garrosh evidently had one particular target in mind. The glow of Elune had actually pointed her out to them. The magnataur, for all their savagery, were intelligent enough to understand what was needed. Garrosh wanted the glowing target destroyed. If it was another priestess, that would be one fewer to aid Tyrande. And if they slew the high priestess . . . they knew that they would deal the
night elves and the Alliance a devastating blow. The shadow of the boulder passed in front of her. The high priestess pulled hard, turning her mount away from the oncoming crash and the deadly spray that would follow. As she did, though, a sharp pain caught her near the shoulder blade. Another did near the lower part of her back. Two arrows had struck the high priestess. Tyrande knew that she had been tricked. Whether by the magnataur or one or two daring archers, Garrosh wanted the night elf ruler dead. In this case, the boulder had been the decoy the archers had needed. And as the monsters from Northrend tore through her people, Tyrande dropped limply to the ground.
25
VALOR
Var'dyn looked impatiently at Archmage Mordent as they neared the grove where they were supposed to finally have answers to the horrendous crimes against the Highborne. Mordent moved with the confidence of one who had made the right decision, a decision of which the younger, ambitious spellcaster did not approve in the least. "What does it matter if we are handed the culprits' heads? Darnassus is complicit in this: you know that! This went on much too long and with too many excuses! The archdruid is-" "Someone who has given us the chance to survive," Mordent replied calmly as he walked. "Pfah! We do not need him to survive! The Highborne-" The senior mage turned abruptly, causing not only Var'dyn, but the rest of the party to stumble to a halt. Mordent studied the other magi-all younger than him-before finally settling his gaze upon Var'dyn once more. "Azeroth has changed . . . changed in a manner unseen since Zin-Azshari fell. Nothing is as it was before. What we have done to maintain our ways for all these millennia no longer applies! How many are there of us now? How are our ranks replenishing? How many children born to our people over the last generation?" Although no one answered-not even Var'dyn-it was not because they did not know the answers. Rather, it was just the opposite: they knew too well the truth. "When we were immortal," the senior archmage went on, "such things did not matter much. Death was a minor occurrence generally due to carelessness.
Now, as with our brethren in Darnassus, we face mortality. But unlike our brethren, the Highborne will not be mourned if we cease to exist, unless we prove we can change. We must abide by the rules of the high priestess and the archdruid until we are accepted back into night elf society. . . ." "We fought beside them-" Var'dyn started. "A moment of necessity more than remorse. As soon as we could, we reverted to our ways, played with our magic-and did nothing else! We learned nothing from Zin-Azshari's fall!" "These murders cannot be forgiven!" Mordent thumped the bottom of his staff on the ground. Sparks flew and the dirt and grass beneath burnt black. "And they will not! If the assassins are captured, they will be turned over to us! Darnassus justice demands that as much as our own! Now, will that satisfy you for the moment?" Var'dyn sullenly nodded. "I will not betray Malfurion and his mate, Var'dyn. They honor their word; I honor mine. That is the key to our future. We respect each other." Archmage Mordent turned back to the path ahead and resumed walking. The other Highborne followed, Var'dyn a step after. However, he quickly repositioned himself next to their leader, and no one argued. Var'dyn had the power and skill to maintain his position unless Mordent decreed otherwise and, despite their current differences, the senior archmage still favored the younger spellcaster. A figure suddenly stepped out onto the path. They recognized one of those who served Maiev Shadowsong. "I have come to lead you." She glanced around at the party. "Best to keep close together. You will need to on the path ahead." Var'dyn sneered, but Mordent politely responded, "Lead on. We are anxious to have this concluded." "So are we. This has gone on long enough." Some of the Highborne nodded satisfaction at this comment. Darnassus after all understood that these heinous crimes had to be punished. They followed the slim female along the winding route, which wound even more than Mordent or Var'dyn recalled from the directions given to them earlier. Still, all that mattered was that soon they would be at their destination. "Where is Maiev?" Mordent asked. "Has she the villains ready for us?" "Justice will be meted out when you arrive there. She promises that."
Even Var'dyn radiated some satisfaction upon hearing that. The Highborne grew more eager to reach their destination, which their guide assured them was very close now. They entered a clearing. The Watcher strode on. "Is this not it?" queried Var'dyn impatiently. Their guide continued walking, not even bothering to look back. "Insolent whelp." Var'dyn raised a hand toward her. Mordent used his staff to bring the hand down before the other mage could cast. "Wait. There is something wrong. . . ." Jagged lines of crimson energy thrust up from the ground. They ensnared the Highborne before any among them could cast a spell. The energy then ran through each of the magi, who doubled over from sharp pain. "As arrogant as ever," someone commented with contempt. "More than ten thousand years and you still think the world bends to your slightest desire. . . ." Mordent, Var'dyn, and some of the others managed to look up at their captor. Maiev Shadowsong smirked as she stepped in front of her prisoners. "The archdruid was more of a challenge than all of you put together!" "What is the meaning of this?" Archmage Mordent demanded through gritted teeth. "Release us!" She chuckled. "You are a dense lot. I am just finishing what I started, only this time to end the game once and for all!" "You!" Var'dyn snarled. "You are the assassin! I was right! Darnassus betrays us!" "Darnassus betrayed me, you mean." Maiev glared. "I served loyally for thousands of years! I protected the sanctity of our life! Then, in one fell swoop, the 'great' archdruid returns to the high priestess, marries her, and is proclaimed co-ruler! He declares us undeserving of regaining our immortality and then, worst of all, he brought your evil back among us!" "Where is the archdruid?" Mordent demanded. "What have you done-?" "Never mind him!" Var'dyn interrupted. "The assassin stands in front of us!" Grinning darkly, he started to glow with power. "You have two ways to die," their captor calmly said. "One is to accept the punishments for your crimes. For that, you will die relatively painlessly." "A little pain means nothing to a Highborne," Var'dyn mocked, the glow about him growing stronger. "Let us see how much pain you can stand. . . ."
Despite the magical bonds that surrounded them, Var'dyn clenched his fist and cast. His body flared bright from so much gathered energy. He screamed-or rather, tried to scream. His mouth gaped, but no sound escaped. Var'dyn's spell faded. Instead, a black aura enveloped him. Those Highborne nearest to him did their best to pull away for fear that somehow they would be caught up in whatever was happening. Var'dyn continued his voiceless scream. His skin seared and began to peel away in burnt fragments. His eyes turned black. He shriveled. The burning Highborne struggled to move, but the bonds of energy held him in place as the spell of the black aura slowly consumed him. His elegant garments became cinders. His flesh crumbled away, followed by the muscle and sinew beneath. Only when those were almost gone did the life extinguish from him. Moments later, even his bones had been reduced to ash that itself vanished. The black aura faded. "That is the second choice of death you have," Maiev blandly remarked. The imprisoned spellcasters looked aghast. Recovering, Mordent said, "There is no need for this. Some agreement should surely be possible-" She turned from them, but not before giving Mordent a crooked, mocking smile. "Oh, we have. We have agreed on your choice of death. Next, we are sure to agree on the crimes you are guilty of that make you deserve it." Mordent looked at her openmouthed, aware that he talked to someone who was utterly mad . . . and who held their lives in her hands.
The moment the sounds of war rang out, Haldrissa had abandoned her rest. Long used to sleeping in her armor-a survival trait of any sensible Sentinel- the commander had only had to put on her helmet. Seizing up her glaive, she had rushed to her nightsaber and ridden in search of her troops. She had spotted them too late. Denea already had them crossing the river with the other groups. Haldrissa had felt an emptiness at watching her warriors go into battle without her. But then she had witnessed the charge of the magnataur. Like so many others, the veteran commander stared at the horrors looming over their comrades. She watched helplessly as one gigantic creature seized part
of a cracked tree trunk and used it to bat away scattering Sentinels. Another took sadistic pleasure in snatching one fighter after another and throwing them toward the defenders still on the other side of the river. Amidst all the carnage that the magnataur created, Haldrissa spotted a more subtle threat. The Horde moved in again behind the behemoths, and among the first were archers. With the Sentinels in disarray, the archers quickly moved across open areas in the river and onto a part of the bank where one of the magnataur's thrown boulders had sent the defenders elsewhere for the moment. The archers did not move as if simply going into battle, and for most purposes they would have been better suited remaining on the opposing shore. These had some other, more nefarious purpose in mind, although she could not say what. Then some of the magnataur began tossing boulders again, this time specifically behind the center of the Alliance lines. Haldrissa had to make her cat veer away from that area in order to avoid being struck by sharp flying fragments. As the nightsaber turned, the high priestess briefly came into her view-as did the fact that Tyrande Whisperwind was directly in the path of the hurtling missiles. There was nothing Haldrissa could do for the high priestess, who she realized was the particular target of the Horde. She gave thanks to Elune when Tyrande evaded the deadly rain, then realized too late why the archers risked themselves so. By that time two arrows had downed the ruler of the night elves. Priestesses and Sentinels rushed to the still figure. In Haldrissa's mind, they wasted their energy. She was also furious with herself for not preventing what had happened, even if in truth there was little she could have done. The Horde became the focus of her collapsing world. They had destroyed Silverwing, slain scores of brave night elves, and now assassinated the high priestess. Haldrissa thought that Azeroth was surely falling into doom, but she swore there and then that the Horde would pay dearly. The commander turned her mount back to the mayhem. She searched everywhere for some way to avenge her people on the orcs. And there he stood. Haldrissa first recognized Garrosh by his stance. He was absolute master of
the battlefield. He waved his foul weapon over his head, and even from where she was, Haldrissa imagined she could hear the axe's wail. Beside him were several orcs who were likely guards, one of whom also carried with him a curled horn. Without at first understanding what she did, the bitter commander charged toward the river. As she rode, reflexes took over, and out came the glaive. When an orc stood in her path, his eyes showing his eagerness for her blood, she rewarded him with a toss of the triple-bladed weapon that shot forth with the speed of an arrow and cut a swath through his barrel chest. Haldrissa had already caught the bloody glaive and ridden past before the orc's corpse could even fall face first into the water. On the other side, someone shouted her name. The commander stirred from her obsession just enough to see Denea staring wide-eyed at her. Two other mounted Sentinels from her outpost also paused to watch. Haldrissa paid them no more mind. Only Garrosh Hellscream mattered. Despite a magnataur noticing her, the veteran warrior urged her nightsaber on. A huge hand grabbed at the commander, but Haldrissa managed to evade the grasping fingers. She rode under the behemoth, avoiding a moving leg. Ahead, an orc mounted on a huge wolf saw her fast approaching and moved to intercept. She could not throw the glaive here, but was more than practiced at using it hand-to-hand. Haldrissa blocked the axe that came at her chest, then slashed with the curved edge of one blade. The glaive tore through the orc's throat, nearly beheading him. He tumbled back, dead. But other orcs now saw her and seemed aware that she could be so close for only one reason. They moved to surround the night elf, who vaguely registered that she was going to die here, only yards from her goal. However, no sooner did the first of the reinforcements join her original foe than he was attacked by another mounted Sentinel. Haldrissa saw that it was Denea. The younger officer fought with a zeal that showed that she understood what her commander hoped to do regardless of the consequences. Denea was not alone, either. Suddenly several survivors of Haldrissa's command closed with the orcs. With them were some of Silverwing's warriors, including both Su'ura and the rogue. The enemy was now temporarily outnumbered. Two orcs fell swiftly. Haldrissa's makeshift attack force pushed
deeper. At last she could see Garrosh himself. The first of his guards faced her. Around Haldrissa, Denea and the others who had joined the commander fought valiantly to create an opening. But time was running out. Haldrissa knew that. The longer she remained unable to reach the warchief, the more likely that she never would. A night elf perished with an axe buried in her chest. Another simply vanished in the melee, her riderless mount battling that of an orc. Haldrissa's comrades were forced to bunch together as more orcs and even tauren moved in from other positions. Garrosh, seemingly oblivious to the struggle so near him, continued toward the river. Haldrissa swore. There were too many foes between her and the warchief. She had lost her chance . . . and soon she would lose her life. For nothing. The trumpeter blew the note to press the attack. The Horde ranks began crossing the river again, the magnataur leaving them an open path occasionally littered by the ghastly remains of their victims. Haldrissa eyed the trumpeter, then urged her cat on. Caught up in the Horde's impending triumph, the orc did not notice her approach. The commander threw the glaive. The orc turned just as the spinning weapon reached him. The movement upset some of Haldrissa's accuracy, and though the blade all but sheared his neck in half-leaving no doubt to the trumpeter's death-the glaive dropped to the ground a short distance farther instead of returning. "Damn!" Dismounting, Haldrissa ignored the lost weapon and rushed to the body. She found the horn still clutched tightly in one hand. Too tightly, in fact: it took all her strength to force open the fingers enough to pull the horn free. No one was looking. Thanking Elune for this last chance, the veteran warrior put the horn to her lips and blew. She knew from past experience some of the general calls used by the Horde. Advance and retreat were the most obvious. Haldrissa now blew the latter as best as she could recall and prayed that in the heat of battle most of those who would heed such a call would not recognize any mistake. At first it seemed that nothing was happening. Haldrissa blew again. As she finished, she saw the first rows, already almost across, falter. Even the magnataur hesitated.
With all her breath, the night elf blew a third time. The Horde lines began to return. Their faces were filled with confusion, a contrast to their expressions during their confident rush forward. That confusion grew and the retreating enemy now ran faster. Managing to inhale enough air, Haldrissa sounded the call one more time. Even the magnataur began to turn back. One tauren tried to wave the leader back to the front, only to be crushed under one heavy foot as the behemoth, entirely ignorant of his victim, thundered back into the forest from which he and the others had emerged. "Give me that!" rumbled an orc voice. She lunged away from the speaker in the direction of her glaive, all the while clutching the horn. In the distance Haldrissa heard the other trumpeters now repeating the call to retreat. They were taking their cue from what they believed to be the master trumpeter with Garrosh. If her adversary succeeded in taking the horn and then blowing the attack once more, all her work would be for nothing. Her hand came down by the glaive just as an axe tried to cut the appendage off. Haldrissa bit her lip as the edge of the axe left a long, bleeding line across the back of her hand and part of her wrist. Despite the pain, she managed to seize the glaive and turn in time to deflect a second strike. He has one eye, just like me, Haldrissa could not help thinking upon first seeing her adversary. He was also an older representative of his race, as she was. However, orcs had never had immortality and thus, compared chronologically to her, he was an infant. In terms of suffering, though, they were akin to one another. "Give me the horn, night elf. . . . I'll not let you steal my last glory! I brought them all the way from Northrend for this!" Without a moment's hesitation the commander slammed the horn against the ground. When that proved insufficient to break it, she quickly brought her glaive down on it. A harsh pain erupted from her heart. Acting almost as swiftly, the orc had tried to keep her from destroying the horn. He had succeeded in killing Haldrissa-she knew the wound was fatal-but from his disgusted expression, he understood very well that her death still meant her victory. Someone far away called Haldrissa's name. She had a vague image of Denea
and the others-far less in number than had followed their aging commander- being forced to retreat. The commander's own mount lay dead, several heavy gashes inflicted by either her opponent or some unseen enemy having done in the brave animal. Her vision grew blurred. A murky figure stepped right in front of her. Haldrissa tried to raise her glaive, but there was too much pain from her chest. No longer caring about war, Haldrissa tried to grab the pain and remove it, but all she did was grasp futilely at the gaping wound. "You fought bravely," she heard the older orc grumble. "You fought cleverly. You don't deserve such slow, painful dying, night elf." Somehow she nodded. What he said made perfect sense. She had fought long and hard for her people. It was time to rest. If only the pain would go away, she could rest. The axe caught her along the throat, cutting deep and at last rewarding Haldrissa's valor with rest.
26
MAIEV
Jarod sensed something close ahead. Although armed only with his knife, he pushed on. A minute later he saw one of Maiev's Watchers. From her bored stance, she looked as if she had been posted on guard duty for some time. It only took a glimpse past her for Jarod to verify that she was guarding the one he sought. Malfurion Stormrage hovered above the ground, his arms and legs splayed to the sides as much as physically possible. Magical energy surrounded him, and it was clear that he was in some pain. At the moment the archdruid appeared oblivious to his surroundings, although it was possible, not to mention quite probable, that Malfurion secretly worked to somehow free himself. The Watcher removed her helmet and wiped her forehead. She looked up at the archdruid, her expression growing from boredom to disdain. Aware that the moment might quickly pass, Jarod had no recourse. As the guard glanced at her charge, he threw the dagger. She fell with barely a sound, the blade through the back of her neck. The helmet tumbled away. Jarod slipped forward, feeling as if he were back in the war against the Burning Legion, so callous about life were his sister and her cohorts. But how else would she become, considering what she has been through? the former guard captain could not help asking himself, managing yet to find some excuse for his sister, his only remaining flesh and blood. She had done so much for the sake of their race that he felt some guilt at having to fight her . . . and yet, she intended to bring ruin to Darnassus. Seizing up the knife, he wiped it off and looked up at Malfurion. Not at all to
his surprise, the archdruid gazed down at him. Jarod waited for Malfurion to speak, but when the archdruid only looked down to his side, Maiev's brother assumed that the trap kept him from doing so. He followed the other night elf's eyes but did not see anything. But there has to be some way to free the archdruid, Jarod thought. He headed toward the area upon which Malfurion focused, all the while thinking about Maiev. Jarod still knew her better than almost anyone, despite the long passage of time. There were traits, ways of thinking, that he was fairly certain remained consistent. Maiev was no major spellcaster. She knew how to adapt things to her needs, though, and over the millennia-and especially with regard to Illidan Stormrage -she had probably picked up several tricks. This had to be one of them. Jarod remembered the trap that had almost killed him. Eadrik had freed him rather quickly. Maiev had needed traps that were strong but easily removed. She had used them to capture and subdue her victims, then no doubt had taken a more personal satisfaction in cutting their throats as they lay helpless. For a moment Jarod hesitated and glanced up again at Malfurion, who could not see him from the current angle. This is your twin's fault, the former guard captain could not help thinking somewhat angrily. She was never like this! You should have had him executed! He deserved that. . . . He shook off the dark notions. Maiev had made her own choices in the end. She knew well enough what she did and found life valueless enough to kill as she desired. Mouth set grim, Jarod inspected the tree and ground around it. That there had been a sentry made him certain that the spellwork itself had little in the way of other defenses. He just had to find the key, hard enough to do- Something very tiny glittered in the bark near the roots. He gingerly brushed off some loose dirt. He found a small stone the color of a pearl wedged into a gap in the bark. Jarod waved his hand over it, but nothing happened. Thinking again of his sister's need for expediency, Jarod simply plucked the stone out. "Ungh!" Malfurion, his one side released, swung toward the tree on the opposing side from the one from which Jarod had removed the stone. Jarod feared that the archdruid would be injured by the collision, but Malfurion
managed to put his free hand between him and the trunk. The archdruid ceased swinging. As Jarod watched in wonder, the tree to which the spell still held him stretched its branches down to its roots. With precision, two smaller branches removed another stone from near the roots, then crushed it between them. Malfurion gently dropped feet first to the ground. Jarod, eyeing the stone in his palm, marveled at both the act and the strength, but wondered why the tree had not done so sooner. Malfurion seemed to expect such curiosity and quickly said, "The trees do not see the world as we do or think exactly as we do. They wanted to help, but were not certain what they could do that would not harm me, since I could not communicate with them because of the trap." "My sister is nothing if not thorough." The archdruid stared at the dead sentry. "Maiev and her Watchers. I still cannot believe it." He peered around. "We had best watch out for Neva. Of all Maiev's Watchers, she is the most fanatical and dangerous." "Neva is dead." In answer to Malfurion's curious gaze, Jarod shrugged, adding, "I killed her after she and others slew Genn's man Eadrik and another worgen." "Why them?" Malfurion asked in some shock. "Eadrik suspected her but doubted anyone would believe it. He and the other died protecting me. Maiev wanted me alive as a dupe; Neva trusted me better dead." "And the Highborne will be next if we do not find her." The archdruid raised his hands to the trees. Although he seemed to simply stand there afterward, Jarod had to assume Malfurion now communed freely with the forest. A breeze came out of nowhere. Above them, the crowns of the nearest trees gently shook. Lowering his hands, the archdruid confidently said, "I know the path! Come!" They rushed through the forest toward their destination, Jarod at first fearing that another trap set by Maiev might do them in before they could reach her. However, he soon noticed that Malfurion constantly looked up as much as ahead. It slowly dawned on the other night elf that the archdruid was now in constant communication with the trees and other flora.
It seemed to take forever, but at last Malfurion bade him halt. The archdruid's eyes narrowed as he studied the path ahead. "Two of Maiev's Watchers ahead." Jarod could see no one but took his companion's word. Malfurion crept forward a few steps, then gestured. There was a slight rustle of leaves, followed by a soft grunt. "Hurry!" Malfurion whispered. Curious, Jarod followed. He kept watch for the two sentries, but even when he and Malfurion reached the area where Jarod assumed they should be, he saw nothing. Aware of the other night elf's confusion, the archdruid muttered, "Look up." The veteran soldier did and saw the figures in question dangling high above. Branches wrapped them as if burial shrouds. They hung very still, and Jarod knew immediately that they were dead. "They left me no choice," Malfurion murmured as the two moved on. Jarod nodded his understanding. Even though a veteran soldier, he would have preferred no more bloodshed, but did not shirk from the necessity. Maiev and her Watchers would not show them any mercy. Barely had they gone a few yards farther when Jarod heard a voice ahead. He knew his sister instantly. She seemed to be proclaiming something, but the words did not carry well. Maiev had chosen a location where even if she spoke loudly, no one very far away would hear. Malfurion guided him more to the east. His expression grew more concerned as they went. "What is wrong?" Jarod finally asked. "We need to move faster, but if we do, she will notice us sooner." As he spoke, there came a low sound that Jarod finally determined was someone else protesting. Although he could still not understand a word, there was a hint of desperation in the tone. Desperation from a Highborne? Jarod grimaced. He could only imagine what Maiev might have done to bring one of the spellcasters to such a strait. Ahead of him, Malfurion uttered a low, angry oath. The archdruid picked up his pace. They came near enough to at last not only better hear but catch a glimpse of what was going on. Even then, Jarod was slightly confused at what his sister had
set into motion. "Now," Maiev almost cheerfully called, her helmet propped in her arm. "Who is next to be judged? You, I think." Neither night elf could see to whom she spoke, but once more there was a protest. "I beseech you again to stop this insanity, Maiev Shadowsong! If you think we must be judged, then bring us before the people of Darnassus-" "'The people of Darnassus'? They will do anything the high priestess or the archdruid tells them! I am the only honest arbiter for this! I am the only one who can mete out true justice for your damnable crimes!" "This way," Malfurion whispered. "I want you to go by that tree, then wait -" Jarod shook his head. "No. You will need a distraction. I will draw Maiev's attention." He paused, then added, "I would like to take her alive, but . . . do what you must. . . ." The archdruid nodded. "As you must, I am sorry to say. Be wary, Jarod. At this point Maiev may consider you nothing more than another enemy to be slain. She let me live only because she wanted me not only to know I had failed to save the Highborne but also so that she could later tuck me into some foul prison and slowly torture me." The former guard captain's expression grew cold. "Maiev will try to kill me. I know that." Jarod's eyes narrowed to slits. "For her sake, she had better hope she succeeds. . . ." Without another word, he left Malfurion and headed toward his sister. Jarod straightened as he stepped out of the woods, one hand clutching the knife. "Maiev . . . ," he quietly called. Without even looking, she replied, "Jarod. Have to say I am proud of you for finding me." She peered over her shoulder at her brother. "Of course, that does not mean I will not make you regret it." Her hand moved with a speed that surprised even him. A knife shot not toward him-but rather where Malfurion hid. A branch shifted seemingly of its own accord. The knife struck deep-and something hidden on the handle flew free. The forest in that direction exploded into flames. Jarod gaped. The inferno spread so quickly, he could not see how Malfurion could have protected himself in time.
Even as she tossed the knife, Maiev used her other hand to throw something else at her brother. However, Jarod had already moved by then, lunging toward his sister and not away as she had evidently expected. Behind him he heard a crackling sound. Ignoring the distraction, he threw his own knife at his sibling. Maiev, her crooked smile taunting Jarod and her hand reaching for her crescent, vanished. Her helmet, released as she went for the weapon, fell to the ground. But Jarod, aware that as warden she had the ability to teleport herself short distances, and having made a calculation of her viable directions-not to mention her insidious thinking-turned his lunge into a roll. Maiev reappeared only a short distance away and at an angle that would have given her a clean strike at her brother. However, she had only a moment to finish drawing her weapon when Jarod bowled her over. The two sprawled together. Maiev lost her grip on her crescent. The blades in his sister's cloak cut Jarod in several places but caused only superficial wounds. Jarod tried to stop his momentum. Unfortunately, he sensed that Maiev had recovered first. Again she vanished, reappearing a few yards from him. "You are getting sneakier!" she jested madly. "That is more like it! That is how you survive when those above send you on one hellish journey after another! That is how you live when demons torture you or the people you are fighting for spit on everything you swore to uphold!" As she spoke, another pair of Watchers trotted into sight. They were not armed with umbra crescents, as he would have expected, but rather glaives. Their murderous gazes fixed on Jarod. One then looked to Maiev. "Oh, by all means, kill my brother," she commanded. "He came here to save them, which makes him as guilty!" "Maiev-" But before he could try to reach whatever sanity might remain within his older sibling, her two followers threw their weapons. He saw why they had glaives now; the crescents were deadly but could not be tossed. Skilled as they were, the Watchers could adapt to whatever weapons worked best for the moment. Jarod managed to completely dodge the first, but the second cut into his right calf. Although he still proved sufficiently dexterous to avoid more than a
glancing cut, the pain was enough to throw him off balance. "I had actually hoped you would see the truth of things, Jarod," Maiev said with mock sadness as she turned back to the imprisoned Highborne. "You sacrificed so much in the beginning. But I guess the same thing that made you decide you could just leave behind your duty and go off merrily with some trollop from the temple makes it impossible for you to appreciate what I have been doing." She eyed the magi. Jarod, trying to find some sort of shield as the glaives returned to his two pursuers, saw that in addition to Archmage Mordent and the other Highborne, there was a corpse of another mage a short distance away. His body was absolutely white, as if covered in frost. Jarod had no time to wonder at the cause of the Highborne's demise. He knew that Maiev was responsible, and that was all that mattered. Worse, from the way she studied the other captives, it was clear that she intended to speed up the executions. Another glaive went flying at Jarod. He judged its speed and dropped to the ground. At the same time he brought his foot up and kicked the soaring glaive from underneath. He only barely missed having his boot and the toes inside sheared off. Still, Jarod accomplished what he desired: the glaive wobbled, then crashed to the ground fairly close to him. But getting the weapon was another question. As he moved toward it, the second glaive came at him. He also saw that the owner of the first weapon now had a long dagger drawn and was heading in his direction. Jarod rolled to the side as the second glaive passed. The spinning blades flew back toward their wielder. He used the moment to reach his objective. However, instead of using it to defend himself, he threw the first glaive in the direction of his sister. One of the other Watchers called out the alarm. Maiev vanished, reappearing next to her umbra crescent. She need not have been concerned with his attack, though, for she had not been his true target. That distinction went to a small golden cone that she had been bending down toward-a cone with four stones the color of pearl. The glaive struck head-on. The cone shattered and the stones flew off in different directions.
Jarod had hoped that by destroying the artifact he would free the Highborne, but such was not the case. They remained prisoners, although he saw that there was relief on the face of more than one. At the very least, Jarod appeared to have either stopped the executions or somewhat delayed them. His sister answered that question. "So clever, my little brother. I will fix it soon enough, though." He had no chance to worry about that, for the Watcher with the dagger then attacked. She slashed back and forth at Jarod, in between each slash kicking at either his midsection or his legs. He managed to stumble out of her way each time, although the gash in his calf grew increasingly painful with each movement. Out of the corner of his eye, Jarod saw his second foe calculating the aim of her glaive. Aware that the second Watcher did not know that he saw her, Jarod pressed his defense against the first. Yet, he kept the other ever on the edge of his gaze. His immediate foe kicked again. Risking getting sliced through the throat by her dagger, the former guard captain bent forward and seized her ankle. Although taken aback and off balance, she nevertheless used the dagger as best as she could, cutting at the hand that gripped her. Jarod grunted with pain as the dagger's tip scraped along his wrist to his hand. Despite the danger, he pulled as hard as he could, bringing her to him. At the last, Jarod spun her around. The Watcher twisted. But it was not the oncoming glaive that struck. The glaive flew past the pair, then rose up as it began its return to its wielder. Rather, what cut his foe through the back, regardless of her armor and severing the spine in the process, was his sister's umbra crescent. Maiev, her helmet on and using the glaive as a distraction, had teleported up to her brother in order to catch him from behind. A permanent glare across her lifeless face, the Watcher collapsed in his arms. Maiev disappeared. The other Watcher reached for the approaching glaive. Scooping up the dagger, Jarod threw it. As the second Watcher started to rise, the blade hit her in the chest. The small weapon did not penetrate the armor but did distract the Watcher. The glaive spun past her hand and tore through the less protected area at the neck . . . then took the Watcher's head immediately after. Jarod paused for a badly needed breath-and felt a terrible pain in his left
arm. He looked down to see what seemed a long, sharp pin sticking out. Lifting his gaze, he met Maiev's eyes. It was clear from the dark intent in them that she had not meant to merely wound him. Only fortune had kept her from killing him. His steady gaze on his sister, he plucked out the pin and, with clear indifference, tossed the bloody missile aside. "Another failure. You made a mistake when you did not kill me after the trap caught me, Maiev." "A mistake quickly remedied," she remarked as she drew something from a pouch. "Just as I have already dealt with our friends. . . ." Jarod peered at the magi. They were writhing in pain, yet no sound escaped them. A dark aura was slowly surrounding them. "I would let you admire my work, but you might see fit to try to interfere again. . . ." Maiev threw whatever she had gathered from her pouch at Jarod. But instead of flying at the former guard captain, the small black particles were blown to the side by an unexpected wind. As the particles hit the various trees and other flora, they created a terrible hiss. Jarod saw smoke rise in each spot. Instinct made him look to Malfurion, who now stood on the other side of the Highborne. The archdruid met his gaze. The millennia faded away as they again became comrades in battle against a dangerous foe. Jarod read the archdruid's intentions and nodded. He moved just as the archdruid bent down in front of another, identical artifact and began concentrating. In doing so, Malfurion presented his back to the insane warden. Maiev swore and reached for her pouch again. Jarod ran for his dagger. Ignoring her brother, Maiev honed in on the archdruid. She raised the hand high. Not caring about accuracy, Jarod tossed the dagger. It collided flat against the helmet just next to the eye slit, momentarily startling Maiev. The contents of her palm-whatever they were-spilled harmlessly to the ground. Drawing her crescent again, Maiev focused on Jarod. "You seem to be running out of tricks, Brother! Getting tired-and old? You can blame the grand and glorious archdruid for that too! Everyone cheers him for his part in getting Teldrassil cleansed and purified of the Nightmare's taint, but they forget that he also fought against getting the World Tree properly
blessed! Said that it was time the night elves actually lived in their world. Death was welcome! You might say that he killed your precious Shalasyr, Jarod! She would be just fine, forever immortal, if he had not decided he knew best for all of us!" "Shalasyr died because it was her time," Jarod responded to his sister. "As we all should." Maiev smiled again. "Then you will not mind dying now." She teleported, reappearing at his right side and swinging her umbra crescent. With a desperate twist, Jarod saved himself from death but not injury. The tips of the blades cut through his side, just deep enough to make him scream. He clutched at the wound as he stumbled forward. Although the wound did not cut into an organ, it was still a harsh one. Jarod had to keep his hand pressed to the six-inch slash as he sought the glaive that had slain the second Watcher. No longer considering her brother of consequence, Maiev immediately spun back to the archdruid. Malfurion was caught up in trying not only to free the Highborne but also to keep them from dying before that happened. He could not afford to take even the slightest concentration away from Mordent and his companions, which left him entirely open to Maiev. Pain and loss of blood threatening to overwhelm him, Jarod reached the glaive. Using the one hand available to him, he did his best to grip the weapon. It was almost impossible for him to stand straight, and he knew that if he did, the blood flow would increase. Nevertheless, Jarod forced himself to do exactly that. He had to stand straight to throw the glaive. Worse, he had to do it without his dominant hand. He had been a guard captain, a military commander, a leader, and then someone simply trying to make certain that he and his wife survived the wilderness. In many ways, even more than his career, his life with Shalasyr had meant that he had been forced to adapt to doing things as necessary, not as convenient. Jarod threw. The glaive flew at Maiev. She heard the sinister whisper of it as it moved exactly as Jarod had calculated. His sister brought up her crescent to deflect the oncoming weapon, her casual movements showing her disdain for his "desperate" act.
But Jarod had not tossed the glaive horizontally, as was normal. He had thrown it almost vertically, and in order to block what she thought was coming, Maiev held her weapon nearly the same way. Thus, unimpeded, the flying glaive tore into her forearm close to the wrist. The blades cut through the armor and into the flesh. Maiev cried out and dropped her crescent. Jarod's toss was not perfect. The glaive returned but landed in front of him, not in his grip again. He had to quickly bend for it, which brought about renewed agony and caused him to falter for a moment. As he stood up, he saw that Maiev was no longer where she had stood. Jarod glanced fearfully in Malfurion's direction, but the archdruid was untouched and well at work. Whatever he was doing had at least caused an end to the Highborne's suffering, though they remained imprisoned. Jarod found Maiev heading toward the far perimeter of the clearing. The hand near the wound hung limply. She held the wound tight with the other hand. A few more steps or a single blink and she would be in the forest, making good her escape. Jarod had to stop her. "Maiev!" She paused and looked back. Through the slits of her helmet, her eyes were still defiant, still mocking. He held the glaive ready. "Surrender, Maiev. You have no choice. I do not want to kill you." She laughed. "And you will not. As I indicated, that is the difference between us, Jarod. I do what has to be done, no matter what." Jarod started to throw. From behind him he heard movement and voices. By the sound of them, they were obviously not more of Maiev's followers but rather searchers from Darnassus. Maiev's eyes flashed in triumph. "You are a fool. I will see our people restored to their greatness. . . . You have only delayed the inevitable." She teleported just as Jarod finally threw. The glaive struck where her lower legs would have been. The blades cut harmlessly into the brush, and the weapon then bounced off to the side. "Elune, forgive me . . . ," he muttered. There were weak moans from the direction of the Highborne. Hand pressed
against his side, Jarod stumbled toward the archdruid, who had finally found the way to release the magi. Many of the Highborne lay sprawled, unconscious. Malfurion looked up from assisting Mordent. Jarod felt his shame rising. "I failed. I am sorry." "You did not fail," the archdruid pointedly replied. "They are alive." Jarod weaved back and forth, the adrenaline that had kept him going now fading. He shook his head. "I mean Maiev. I could have stopped her. I could have killed her. She would have killed me." "I know that." Malfurion turned his head to observe several Sentinels and two druids burst into the area. "They will find her. They will take her alive, if possible." He looked to Jarod again. "You did not fail, Jarod. You remained what a night elf should be. Maiev did not." "I-" Jarod felt the world starting to turn on its head. His hand slipped away from the wound, enabling Malfurion to see just how bad it actually was. "I-" "Cenarius! Jarod! You should have told me!" "She is my sister-" The archdruid jumped up to grab him as he collapsed.
27
THE HORDE ASCENDANT
The Alliance lines struggled to re-form. Shandris knew that they had little time; if she were Garrosh-as repugnant a thought as she could imagine-she would get the Horde and, especially, the magnataur to turn around and resume the attack. Even if he did not know about the success of his archers in bringing down Tyrande, he would not want to waste the chaos he had already sown. Tyrande . . . Shandris fought back a shiver. The archers had come closer to killing the high priestess than they even knew. Of course, none of them had survived to tell their master; Shandris had spotted them too late for her mother, but not too late to have her own archers shoot them. The Sisters of Elune prayed feverishly over Tyrande, who was better but not yet whole. There had been something on the arrow heads that persisted in her body. She would recover, but it would take time. And time they did not have, for even as Shandris got something of a semblance of order set up near the river, she heard horns in the forest beyond sounding over and over. There was no doubt in her mind that the defenders were mere moments from a new attack, and this time there would be no fortuitous and epic charge such as Denea and the handful of survivors had informed her Commander Haldrissa had bravely led. Haldrissa's choice to convert a failed attempt to kill Garrosh into a trick that had turned defeat into reprieve would be sung by night elves for generations to come . . . assuming that there were generations to come. Shandris eyed the forest to the north; the land rose higher there, low hills that, given other circumstances, might have proved valuable in a counterattack. She wished that they had been able to set up an outpost there back when the
entire land had been theirs, but now it was impossible. The general surveyed the rest of the region and had to admit that Haldrissa had arranged matters as well as anyone could. Shandris had noticed that some of the younger officers, including Denea, had laid hints that perhaps their commander should be permanently shunted aside, but they had renounced any such thoughts after her bravery. Older Haldrissa might have gotten, but she had gotten older because she was good. And a lot of other night elves will not be getting any older after this day is over. . . . "Take over!" she ordered one of her aides. Turning her nightsaber, she headed back to where the other priestesses had Tyrande. One of attendants looked up as she approached, but the general had no interest in anyone but her mother. Fortunately, to Shandris's great pleasure, Tyrande's eyes were open. "My daughter," she greeted the general. Not caring how it might appear, Shandris dismounted and went to hug the high priestess. Tyrande returned the hug with equal vigor. "You are well?" Shandris asked. "I still have some trouble focusing, but, yes . . . I am fairly well." She stared deep into the general's eyes. "They are coming." Tyrande was not asking, but rather informing. Shandris was not surprised. "I expect that they will be at the edge of the forest in two minutes at most." The high priestess pushed herself up onto her elbows, then had to shut her eyes a moment. "Whatever Garrosh had the archers use, it was very potent . . . not that my wounds were anything small. The Horde has expert shots." "And we had better ones. The Horde paid." A new horn sounded. This time, it was an Alliance horn. "Bring me Ash'alah," demanded the high priestess. "You are not well enough-" Shandris began, only to stop when Tyrande gave her a look. Rather than argue when orcs were about to rush down on them, the general gave Tyrande a hand up. One of the priestesses brought forth Ash'alah for Tyrande. She mounted and, after Shandris had done the same, the pair raced off to the front. Horns began to blow in earnest across the Alliance lines. They seemed to echo those coming from the forest. Still none of the enemy was visible to either Shandris or Tyrande, but something had surely caught the attention of the sentries.
What it was became evident as they rode up. The treetops were shaking. The magnataur were on the move. "Fire arrows," Shandris decided. "We send enough fire arrows, we burn down the forest and send the magnataur running for their damned lives. . . ." "'Burn down the forest'?" Tyrande took a breath and straightened. Then, "Perhaps you are right. . . ." "I do not know if I am. . . . The fire might just make them meaner. . . . I do not know what else to do." The general looked at Tyrande. "Unless Elune-" "The Mother Moon does not exist to answer our every demand like a servant," the high priestess replied. "But I have been praying to her constantly since I awoke." "And?" "And all I know is that we must fight and accept either death or survival." Shandris grunted. "I just love Elune." She checked that her glaive was secure, then readied her bow. "She ought to consider how lonely it might be for her without us." "Shandris-" The general chuckled darkly. "I am only jesting." The treetops nearest to the river began shaking. The general sent out the order for fire arrows to her messengers, who rushed to tell the archer commanders. As the riders vanished on their missions, a familiar but still horrifying roar burst from the forest ahead. It was answered by five equally monstrous calls. "Keep praying, Mother," Shandris said as she rode forward. "Keep praying. . . ." "I have never stopped," Tyrande replied, the high priestess following her daughter into war . . . and probably doom.
It did not matter that the magnataur had already ripped paths to the Alliance lines. Weak things such as trees were easily shoved aside. The titanic creatures from Northrend tore asunder the forest as they reached the river. It was not as if their masters cared. The Horde wanted Ashenvale most of all for its timber, and the destruction of the forest by the angry behemoths would only make the harvesting that much quicker once the enemy was dead. The orcs and their allies followed behind, although not too close behind.
Several had died in the retreat of the magnataur, the creatures not discriminating between trees in their path or soft, crushable bodies. Both the magnataur and the fighters following were more than eager for blood after the trickery they had faced earlier. Slaves to Garrosh the behemoths might be, but they did not like being made the fools any more than an orc or tauren or even a goblin. And there was more than enough Alliance blood to satiate them. The moment the lead magnataur bull broke through to the river, flaming arrows assailed him. Several struck the nearby trees, but not enough to start a blaze. Those that hit the magnataur only made him angrier as he brushed them away like so many gnats. Even then, the barrage continued, spreading as the other bulls also reached the river. There was no signal to tell the titanic monsters to keep moving. As Shandris had surmised, Garrosh had no desire to let the Alliance regroup anymore than it could. The warchief would crush his enemies here and now and take Ashenvale in one swift, sweeping victory. Horde archers began firing the moment that they reached their designated positions. Their return fire forced the Alliance archers to shoot back at them and left fewer to try to turn back the magnataur with the fire arrows. The latter mission was not progressing well, anyway, Shandris saw as she shot a grinning troll through the chest. They would have needed much more fire to turn away the beasts. Moonlight suddenly shone in the faces of the magnataur, even though there was no moon to create it. Shandris smiled, but the smile faltered as the magnataur proved to be unaffected. They were creatures of Northrend and as such lived in a place where snow and ice could be even more blinding. They were adapted to survive such conditions, and now those made yet another potent weapon of the defenders moot. The lead bull crossed the river. It did not take him much effort. As he came onshore, lancers charged at his legs, seeking to wound one and possibly cause him to lose his balance. They might as well have been more gnats. The magnataur grabbed two cats and smashed them and their riders into a stomachchurning, unidentifiable mess that he afterward tossed among the defenders. Now a horn sounded from the Horde side. With wild, eager cries, Garrosh's warriors at last rushed forward.
"We have no choice but to meet them!" Tyrande called to her. "I know!" Shandris gave the signal. The regiments in wait surged toward the river. As they did, the archers up front retreated under cover from comrades behind them. More lancers joined the Alliance push. The armies came together, the clash of arms playing over and over. Night elves fell. Orcs died. And though they were the dominant forces of the opposing sides, they were each joined in death by many allies: tauren, human soldiers from Theramore, dwarves of the three clans, troll warriors, and more. Shandris could not see the entire battle, but she knew that scores perished in the first few seconds alone. But worst of all, the magnataur were unstoppable. They ripped through the Sentinels as if the seasoned warriors were stalks of wheat and the magnataur were reapers. Bodies lay everywhere and in every sickening condition. The night elves tried in vain to focus on the behemoths, Horde archers keeping any attempt to attack the magnataur from even beginning. Thus left unchecked, the fearsome creatures continued to wreak their havoc. The priestesses of Elune both fought and healed, and because of that they and their leader were also special targets of any Horde archer. Despite the Mother Moon's blessing, Sisters were not indestructible, as Tyrande had almost proven herself. Their numbers were depleted quickly and those still left were forced to take greater defense and thus become less effective in aiding their comrades. Although commander of the Sentinels, Shandris did not shirk from the struggle, either. When not making expert use of her bow, she threw her glaive again and again, and rarely did she miss with either weapon. She also had to shield herself from more than her share of arrows and other weapons intent on ending the life of one of those most essential to the hopes of the faltering defenders. Tyrande also fought. She had faced demons, shadow creatures, orcs, and more in her long life, and fell into the rhythm of war with more ease than she cared to think about. Yet, for every enemy that fell, there seemed a dozen more. And again, there were always the magnataur. The Sentinel lines finally cracked. "We cannot hold them here!" Tyrande shouted. "The riverbank is lost! Pull
back!" Shandris grabbed the lead trumpeter. "Sound the call! We move to the secondary position!" The trumpeter blew hard, her notes picked up by the other surviving trumpeters. Tyrande and Shandris had decided on a backup position a little farther in, where the natural rise of the area would give them a bit of a defensive wall. Against the magnataur it would be nothing, but it would at least slow the Horde itself. As best they could, the Sentinels and their allies moved. They did battle all the way, the archers trying to buy some distance between the defenders and the attackers. The magnataur, caught up in their eagerness for destruction, did not follow the Horde at first, buying the Alliance a few precious seconds. But a few seconds were indeed all that bought, and as Tyrande and Shandris fell back with the rest, both were keenly aware that from their second position . . . there was nowhere left to go. Ashenvale was falling.
Ashenvale falls, Garrosh Hellscream thought with growing anticipation. Ashenvale falls, Father! Garrosh wondered how his father would have viewed this victory. Would he have been proud? Even eight magnataur had proven enough to easily crush the decadent Alliance. They had been all he needed to tilt the balance once and for all. This land will help us grow, he thought as he surged forward with the rest of his loyal force. A Sentinel caught behind the collapse of her lines sought to bring more glory to her doom by suddenly leaping up from the dead to attack him. She proved to be a decent adversary, briefly stalling his advance, and so when Gorehowl ripped through both her breastplate and her torso, he wished her spirit well in the afterlife. This would be a battle of which the young would be taught forever. Every family would have heroes to name in the festivals that would come after the war's triumphant end. Even the legendary Thrall, Garrosh's predecessor-even Thrall, who had been reluctant to renew the struggle for Azeroth-would surely call Garrosh the champion of the orc race and of all the Horde.
Ashenvale is ours . . . and the rest of Azeroth will follow. . . . There is nothing more mighty than the Horde . . . nothing that the Alliance can do to change what fate demands of this new world. . . . One had to be strong in the Azeroth that Deathwing had created. The Alliance had once been so, but it was of the past. The Horde was of the future. Garrosh was the future. He almost pitied the night elves and their ilk. They fought bravely but without a chance. They acted as if there were hope, when it was obvious there was not. Garrosh had used the very summit intended to bring his enemies together in order to catch them most off guard. The other factions of the Alliance had provided the night elf force with the handful of supporters that he had calculated. By the time Theramore and the others were able to send greater numbers, the Horde would have Ashenvale secured. Ashenvale is ours, the warchief repeated to himself, savoring that fact. Ashenvale is- An unearthly howl arose from the forest to the north. The warchief missed a step as he looked that direction. He knew wolves, dire wolves, and most of their cousins, and this sounded like none of those. The howl repeated, this time much stronger, much more challenging, and Garrosh knew right away that it challenged the Horde. Moreover, he was not the only one. Everywhere, orcs and others hesitated, eyed the forest, and clutched their weapons a little tighter. Even the magnataur looked up in curiosity at this sharp cry. And from the forest there answered a multitude of similar howls. Even from where he stood, Garrosh could hear the shaking of leaves and brush as something that seemed as massive in its own way as the magnataur closed on the battlefield. Recovering, he raised Gorehowl and opened his mouth to shout orders. Stunned yells arose from those warriors farther to the north, the ones who had been passing through the forest toward the night elves' position. Those shouts were followed by growls and screams. "To the north, you fools!" Garrosh commanded. "To the north-" Out they flowed, a river of dark death. Wave after wave of sleek, furred forms. The orcs, trolls, and tauren Garrosh saw in their path went down in a flash of weapons and claws. The fiends moved like the wind and spread out as
they met the Horde. But most amazing of all was that at their head ran a human. Yet, he moved like no human, but indeed seemed more a wolf than even the dread fighters who flanked him. He wielded a sword that glittered and that identified him to Garrosh from clear across the terrain. "The sword Shalamayne . . . ," Garrosh snarled, his fury rising swiftly. "Varian Wrynn . . ."
28
THE SWORD AND THE AXE
It had taken every resource for Varian to get himself, his crew, and, most of all, the worgen to Ashenvale in time. In truth, he had expected to come to find that all had been laid waste in the Alliance-held lands and that everyone he knew among the defenders was dead. Yet, as the ship had dropped anchor as near as they could and the worgen disembarked, he had suddenly been filled with a sense that, not only had he not arrived too late, but his belief that this had been his destiny all along was more true than he could have imagined. The moment that he stepped onto the shore of Ashenvale, Varian had felt the call of Goldrinn even more than he had during the ritual. It had grown stronger with each breath he took-so strong that he finally no longer resisted it but fully embraced it. Clad in lightweight but durable leather armor and with Shalamayne sheathed at his side, Varian started running, running with purpose. Genn Greymane had seen him standing there, watching the forest. The aura of Goldrinn had grown around the king of Stormwind. All the worgen could see it, even if Varian's own people could not. Genn had realized what was about to happen and had been the one to tell those of Stormwind to follow as best they could later. Almost immediately after that point, Varian had disappeared among the trees. Genn had followed . . . and the worgen had followed him. Varian would recall little of the run through the forest. He only knew deep inside that somehow he ran faster than should have been possible, that he seemed to outrace time itself. The spirit of Goldrinn fueled him, the great wolf's fury touching his heart and enabling Varian to push on and on toward his
destination. At last, sensing something, he drew to a halt as Genn and the worgen came up behind him. Genn blinked, sniffed the air again, and muttered a single word that verified Varian's suspicions: "Horde . . ." That word encompassed so many smells, so many aspects, of the enemy. Varian himself could smell the muskiness of the orcs and the tauren, the sweat of many trolls, the decay of the Forsaken, the smoke of many fires, and the stench that could only be attributed to goblin machines. The other worgen raised their snouts as they, too, smelled the nearness of the enemy. Varian led them a bit closer and they caught their first glimpses of the battlefield. At that point he had drawn Shalamayne and, seeing what he and the worgen must do, had thrust the sword forward and shouted a war cry. The worgen had howled with him, and Genn, glancing Varian's way, had seen the aura around the king of Stormwind radiate stronger than ever. The snarling visage of Goldrinn had loomed over the wolf Ancient's champion. Varian had leapt into the fray, the worgen spreading out as he had bidden them. The first of the Horde had been brought down with almost ridiculous ease, so disbelieving had they been of the sight. Now, as the worgen spread out into the main battlefield, Varian decided on his next course of action. He wanted dearly to find Garrosh Hellscream, but such a personal battle had to take second place to the more imminent disaster. "To me!" he roared to the nearest worgen. Without looking to see who followed, he ran-yes, ran, despite so much distance already crossed-and headed for the lead magnataur. A shaggy tauren saw him and moved to intercept. The heavy axe created a dust cloud as it drove into the ground where Varian should have been. However, the king had moved far more swiftly than his bullheaded adversary had calculated. Varian was already to the side of the much bulkier, taller warrior. With Shalamayne, he slashed across the tauren's torso, cutting so deeply that the tauren was dead before he fell. The Horde ranks no longer charged forward. They were already painfully aware of a new and powerful enemy in their very midst. Yet, the orcs and their allies were not used to the fluid movements of the worgen. Underestimation of the lupine attackers led to many Horde deaths in the first few moments.
That was not to say that worgen did not perish. The Horde had not thrived without being able to adapt. Two orcs combined to catch a worgen between them. What one axe failed to strike, the other caught in the spine. Other worgen dropped with bolts through their chests or throats. But the Horde suffered much greater. Not only was this a foe that they had never met before, but it came at them from the side, forcing them to face both the west and north at once. After all, Tyrande and Shandris were not so slowwitted as not to realize that they once again had hope. Even with the magnataur still wreaking havoc, they managed to re-form some of their lines and counterattack. But all of this Varian only vaguely registered as his view swept from the field to his prey. The bull had turned his attention to this new enemy of his masters. A huge hand grabbed at a worgen and, while not succeeding in snatching him up, did inadvertently swipe the unfortunate Gilnean, sending him hurtling to his death. Two orcs attacked Varian, but a worgen leapt at one, pulling the greenskinned warrior to the ground, where they struggled. The worgen's claws tore through the throat of the orc. Varian dodged the swing by the second orc, came under his shield, and thrust Shalamayne through the orc's midsection. Pulling the sword free, the king then had to jump to the side as one back leg of the magnataur came down. The gigantic creature turned. However, the magnataur were not built for speed. They did not need to be: they were so huge that they covered distance readily. However, in close combat, Varian at least had the advantage in mobility, as long as he avoided the feet or the hands. That, though, would avail him nothing in the long run, and he had no intention of merely running. As the behemoth instinctively turned after him, Varian moved toward the hind leg again. He came within reach. "Varian Wrynn!" roared a voice the king recognized. "Varian Wrynn, I challenge you! Turn and meet your doom!" Varian whirled. Garrosh Hellscream, Gorehowl raised high, grinned as the two faced one another. The human said nothing, his expression answer enough for the orc. They converged, the axe wailing as the two weapons clashed and sparks flew. The force of their strike sent both combatants stumbling back a few steps.
The warchief grinned ominously. "Such a weapon! With Gorehowl, it will make the finest comrade an orc could wield!" "Shalamayne prefers the taste of orc blood," Varian replied. "Yours especially. . . ." He lunged. The orc deflected his strike, the blade and the axe head again sending up a shower of sparks. Garrosh swung. The human countered. Again and again, the two champions found themselves as evenly matched as their fabled weapons. "I've waited for this moment!" Garrosh grinned. "Our fight in Ulduar was too brief and without satisfaction, especially since I did not then have Gorehowl to match against your sword. . . ." "My sentiments exactly!" The king deflected another strike by Gorehowl, both fighters forced to squint as sparks from the clashing weapons flew at their eyes. "I promise not to disappoint you this time . . . except when I take your head. . . ." The orc laughed. "Your skull will have a place of honor on the gates of Orgrimmar!" He swung Gorehowl low, seeking to catch Varian by surprise and disembowel the human. The king turned Shalamayne down and, though the angle was awkward, kept the axe from his torso. Ignorant of the battle waging below him, the magnataur continued his turn as he hunted for the puny human. Varian saw the great leg sweeping toward them. He rolled back as Garrosh, not yet aware of the danger, readied another blow from the wailing axe. The leg struck the orc. It was only a glancing blow, but it was enough to send Garrosh sprawling. Unable to see what happened to Garrosh after that, Varian chose to sheathe Shalamayne. He watched as the magnataur settled in place for a moment. When that happened, Varian jumped at the leg. The moment he grabbed hold of the magnataur's fur, the monster roared and tried to shake him loose. But before the behemoth could, another figure clung to the other hind leg. The worgen began his climb at the same time as Varian, creating a distraction for the king. A second worgen jumped onto the same leg as Varian. Several more quickly did the same. They were for the most part those he had commanded to follow
him, but who had become momentarily separated by the battle. Gritting his teeth, Varian pulled himself up. The first part of his plan had come into play, but now he had to follow through. Without the aid of claws, Varian still reached the back of the magnataur long before the first worgen. The magnataur twisted as much as his upper torso would allow him. His hand came agonizingly near Varian, who drew Shalamayne and cut at the fingers. He was rewarded with the behemoth snatching the bleeding hand back, which allowed several of the worgen to make it to the king. There was no need for words. The worgen knew their task. Like ants, they raced up and around the magnataur and, wherever their blades, maces, and other mundane weapons proved too unmanageable, began rending the flesh with their claws and even biting. The thick, tough hide of the gigantic creature protected at first, giving the magnataur the chance to try to brush off some of the vermin on him. A half dozen worgen went spilling off the beast, some managing to land well or snag hold of a leg, but others plummeting to their deaths. But then a worgen managed the first tear in the magnataur, his success followed immediately by another. The bull howled in rage and shook back and forth. With his stocky build, especially his elephantine lower half, the magnataur could no more jump than the mammoth that part of his body resembled. Instead, he abruptly reared up on his hind legs, seeking with the unexpected motion to dislodge his attackers. Two worgen fell free, but Varian and the rest managed to maintain their grips despite this surprise. More worgen joined those swarming the magnataur. They clambered over his back, his neck, and some of the most daring even tore into his chest. Alone or even if only a dozen or so, they would have been mere annoyances . . . but now they began to take a toll. The bull's rage took on a hint of frustration, then pain, as he bled from more than two dozen wounds. Shalamayne proved even better than ordinary swords and claws at cutting through the rough hide. His feet braced, his balance careful, Varian slashed again and again, opening ravines in the magnataur's back. Another angry bellow caught his attention. The next nearest magnataur had finally chosen to aid the bull. It was not out of any loyalty between the monsters, but rather a sense of survival. The other magnataur had realized that anything that could potentially harm their leader could next turn on the others.
Varian grinned. The reason for his grin became instantly apparent as more worgen suddenly crawled up the legs of the oncoming magnataur. No longer interested in assisting the dominant bull, the other behemoth tried in vain to clear his own hide of the rapidly increasing numbers of lupine invaders. A battle horn blowing an Alliance signal made Varian look to the night elves' lines. Without the magnataur in direct conflict with them, the Sentinels were able to even better regroup. What had been a rout was now more of a balanced battle again. Varian planned to take it further than that. The worgen, heedless of their danger, did not flinch from attacking the other magnataur. Others of the great pack continued their rush into the midst of the Horde forces and, from the monster's back, Varian could see the swath of death that the Gilneans had already made through the enemy. The bull suddenly began to move toward the deeper forest. Varian knew what he planned: the magnataur intended to either seize a partial tree trunk and try to knock the worgen off, or begin rubbing against the standing trees in the hopes of doing the same. Varian returned to one of the hind legs. There, he found, of all Gilneans, Genn Greymane. "Why are you here?" "To make sure what you want done is done!" the other monarch roared back. Varian was actually pleased to see him. "The other hind leg! We need to get down lower while he's distracted!" Genn looked puzzled until Varian made a cutting motion. The worgen then smiled. "I'll take the lead with them!" They separated without another word. Varian sheathed his sword, then began his descent. What he planned could not have been done until now. The magnataur needed to be focused on the worgen as a whole, not a few who climbed down now instead of up. As he reached the point he desired, Varian drew Shalamayne. He glanced at the other hind leg. Despite the creature's movement, the worgen easily clung to the limb. Genn had just reached the same level as Varian. Without hesitation, and with his other hand and his legs holding him as best they could, Varian Wrynn used Shalamayne to cut as deep and wide a wound as he could in the back of the magnataur's leg.
The beast roared in sudden agony. It stumbled to the side, nearly dislodging some of the worgen elsewhere. Varian hoped for the best for the brave Gilneans as he readjusted his aim and, instead of slashing, drove Shalamayne deep. The effect was instantaneous. The bull's leg collapsed. Sword gripped tightly, Varian threw himself free. He landed a short distance from the crippled leg. Blood dripped out of the wound, but that was not why the leg could not hold any longer: Varian had expertly severed the tendon. The magnataur tried to keep moving, but the damaged limb slowed him too much. It gave Genn and the worgen on the other leg the opportunity they needed. With the lord of Gilneas guiding the others, the worgen thoroughly tore into the same area that Varian had. Genn cut deep with his longsword through what his claws could not rend. Already in terrible pain from the first leg, the magnataur belatedly tried to reach back and grab the Gilneans. With one final cut, Genn finished the tendon. He howled sharply, then jumped from the ruined appendage. Warned by Genn, the rest of the worgen fled the wounded magnataur. As the last of them leapt to safety, the struggling giant, in the act of trying to seize the king of Gilneas, lost his balance as the second leg gave out. With an almost mournful roar, the dominant bull tumbled onto his left side. His collision with the ground created a shock wave that tossed many of the combatants in the vicinity from their feet. But it was not over yet. Varian cried out a wordless challenge and bounded onto the struggling behemoth. He ran toward the head even as worgen once more swarmed the rest of the body. With fingers still bleeding from Varian's earlier strike, the magnataur swatted at whatever worgen he could reach. Some of the most eager of the worgen fell prey to the swinging hand, but Varian dodged it, then raced up past the shoulder to the neck. The fearsome visage twisted in his direction, the magnataur's long, curving tusks sweeping toward Varian and nearly succeeding where the hand had failed. The baleful eyes glared at the puny human who had caused him so much pain. Varian felt the muscles leading to the arm move and knew that the wounded magnataur had come to realize that this was prey finally within easy reach. With the hand rushing to him, Varian held Shalamayne downward with both
hands and stepped off the neck. As he dropped, he took the sword and jammed it into the soft part of the throat. The fabled blade cut through as if the flesh there were water. The magnataur's life fluids drenched Varian as he continued a drop slowed only by how long it took Shalamayne to cut through. A great gurgle escaped the bull. The behemoth thrashed about, in his death throes threatening to do to Varian what he could not before. A furred form seized Varian before the arm could crush him. He and his worgen rescuer rolled in a heap, Shalamayne flying a short distance away. Varian picked himself up. He discovered only then that his rescuer was none other than Genn. The worgen leader lay stunned. Varian knelt by his side and discovered that Genn had struck his head hard. Blood matted the fur there. Genn's eyes opened. He stared up at Varian. "Such fury! Small wonder you are Goldrinn's chosen champion. . . . " The worgen leader blinked, his humanity quite evident in his eyes despite his furred form. "I feared for a moment that we'd lose you due to your impetuousness." "Your people almost lost you instead." "A small price to pay. The worgen have found you. We have found our place through you." Varian looked for his sword. "Our place may be the grave. This battle isn't over." Genn sought to rise, then winced and sat back again. He took a deep breath, then tried once more. This time, the worgen leader succeeded. Varian retrieved Shalamayne, but as he looked up again, he saw something amidst the chaos of the battlefield that made him bare his teeth. "Don't follow me, Genn." "What-" Not waiting around to explain, Varian charged back into the struggle. An orc saw Varian and foolishly tried to take him. The lord of Stormwind barely noticed as Shalamayne sank deep in the orc's chest. A second warrior fell as quickly and just as unnoticed. Varian only had interest in one opponent, the same one who had earlier hunted him with such obsession, but from whom the human had been separated by circumstance.
Garrosh Hellscream. The battling armies once more obscured the warchief from Varian's view, but Gorehowl's shriek was unmistakable, even from a distance. Varian paused and listened again as the axe sang its song of death, then altered his path. A horn blared from the Alliance side and suddenly there were lancers on nightsabers everywhere. Horde warriors scattered as the huge cats brought new death among them. One of the lancers came to the rescue of a worgen surrounded by enemies, the lance running through one as the nightsaber ripped apart two others. The worgen readily handled the rest. A magnataur bellowed, his body almost literally covered with worgen. Several worked at the legs and, even as Varian passed them, one limb gave. The worgen were everywhere in the battle, darting in and about and slashing with either weapon or claws as the need arose. Ghoulish Forsaken retreated in the face of a foe too swift for them, the undead having already seen several of their number ripped apart or cut to wriggling, useless pieces. Hardened tauren sought to take a stand, but their very agile foes more often than not got under their defenses, striking true and finally pushing the tauren back. The top half of a goblin machine spun around and around as its operator frantically tried to keep two worgen at bay. The Gilneans calmly waited until they had the measure of the mechanism's movements, then one sprang past the whirling blades, landed behind the driver, and raked the goblin's back with his claws. A glaive flew past Varian, the rushing weapon followed by two more. Sentinels on foot now entered the thickest part of the struggle. Some continued to toss their blades over and over while others used the glaives in hand-to-hand combat. With them came Stormwind's forces, who instantly surged toward where the worgen-and thus King Varian-fought. The outcome of the struggle was far from clear, save that now at least the Alliance had a chance. Then lines began to re-form on the Horde side. Varian heard Gorehowl once more, this time exceedingly close by. He picked up his pace, unaware that one of the mounted Sentinel officers saw him. Alerting another, the night elf had her force follow the king of Stormwind. Worgen also began to track behind Varian as he moved quickly across the field despite a path littered with bloody and mangled bodies from both sides. Still ignorant of the charge he had begun leading, Varian closed on the area
where he was certain that he would find Garrosh. Capture or slay the warchief, and the battle ended. That was all that mattered. . . . A line of orcish archers suddenly rose up from hiding and fired at the oncoming enemy. Somehow, Varian dodged those shafts that came near him. He had no notion as to what happened behind him. Some of those who followed perished, but others quickly replaced their numbers. There was a sense among the Alliance that a defining moment was upon them, that this charge led by the king of Stormwind would make or break the day. But on the other side, the Horde was more than ready to meet this new challenge. The deadly flight of arrows preceded a rush of heavily armed and armored warriors both on foot and astride the great dire wolves. Still paying no heed to those who followed him, Varian saw the enemy ranks as merely impediments. When the first dire wolf reached him, he used Shalamayne to slice through one eye and pierce the brain. As the animal fell forward, Varian stepped up atop its head and all but cut the orc rider in two. A blood elf who grabbed for the lord of Stormwind pulled back with his hand lost. Axes and blades tore at his garments and bloodied his body, but none were more than nuisances, and they slowed him not a bit. And though he himself did not notice it, did not feel it, both those who followed and those who faced him thought that they saw in the dust and smoke swirling in his vicinity the darting form of a great wolf. Who first shouted the name was a question none could answer. The worgen assumed it was one of their own, for had they not been the first to recognize the king of Stormwind as the Ancient's champion? The Sentinels believed it either the high priestess or her general, while those dwarves and humans who had accompanied the expedition from Darnassus thought someone of their ranks was responsible. What mattered was that someone first shouted "Varian!" and then "Goldrinn!" and those names repeated over and over to become the new battle cry. It was a cry that reverberated through the Horde ranks and sent the first true hint of uncertainty through their minds. The victory should have been theirs long ago. The Alliance should have fallen. What was happening now was not how the magnificent plan had been supposed to play out. And none knew the last more than Garrosh Hellscream. The future that he had envisioned coming to fruition once Ashenvale was in Horde hands now
looked so very distant. His ultimate weapon, the crushing power of the magnataur, had now become a much-too-visible image of his master strategy gone awry. Even as he thought that, another of the giants went crashing to the ground. Worgen swarmed over the fallen behemoth, seeking especially the throat. One of the Kor'kron pushed close to Garrosh. "Warchief, you risk yourself here! We cannot lose you. . . ." "Lose me?" Garrosh shoved the insolent guard aside. "I will not hide from battle!" "But the Alliance-" The warchief glared, causing the hardened guard to flinch. Garrosh roared another command, sending in reinforcements where the accursed worgen had weakened his forces. The Alliance's new battle cry pounded in his head. Garrosh could not make out exactly what the enemy called, but he could see how it stirred them to greater effort against his warriors. "What is that? What words do they shout?" Another guard answered. "They cry the name of the human king . . . and with it, Goldrinn . . . their title for the great Lo'Gosh!" "The wolf Ancient . . ." Garrosh's gaze searched the struggle. "Lo'Gosh . . . and Varian Wrynn . . ." And as he once more spoke the human's name, the orc leader spotted the Alliance's apparent champion among the enemy encroaching on his position . . . and Varian Wrynn spotted him. In silent agreement, they pushed toward one another. Garrosh's personal guard protested, but he slipped in among the other fighters and left his wouldbe protectors struggling to reach him. Shalamayne moved as a blur, cutting and slaying any who stood in the king's way. Brave though orcs, tauren, blood elves, and trolls might be, foolish they were not. There was better chance for glory-and life-against many others. But one figure did come between the two, Varian his intended hunt, also. His impetuous thrust almost did what so many had failed to do. However, the cut in Varian's arm was shallow. Briln, the edge of his axe blade stained with the human's blood, glared at Varian. "My magnataur!" roared the former mariner bitterly. "My glory and honor!
Look what you've done!" His ferocity forced Varian into momentary retreat. Briln had not survived for so long without being skilled with the axe, as Haldrissa had discovered to her detriment. There were tricks that he could have even taught Garrosh-not that such a thing mattered at the moment to the distraught orc. The magnataur were to have been his way of redeeming himself for all the catastrophes of the journey, especially the lives lost. Now this human, this lone human, was undoing that. Varian had no time for this insane orc. He knew that Garrosh was very close, even perhaps almost within striking range. Yet, the former mariner would not be denied. Briln swung again, and in doing so reminded Varian of his one obvious weakness. The eye patch meant darkness was all that the orc could see on that side, and even though Briln knew that, too, he could still not change that fact. Varian let the orc attack anew, and when the swing pulled Briln so that his lost eye best faced the human, Varian drove Shalamayne into his adversary's chest. Briln dropped his weapon as Varian pulled Shalamayne free. The orc fell to his knees. Still glaring at Varian, he gasped, "My . . . magnataur . . . my . . ." The captain crumpled, and Varian swung Shalamayne behind his own back. A shock ran through his body as the blade met metal. Half kneeling, he spun and blocked a second swing. Both times an inhuman wail preceded the clash. "I knew you'd deflect both," Garrosh rumbled in honest admiration as he loomed over Varian. "You would not be who you are if you could not. . . ." "I'd be dead," Varian answered lightly. "I'd be you." The warchief chuckled . . . and attacked. Shalamayne and Gorehowl bit at one another once, twice, three times. Their wielders brought them together so quickly that, rather than sparks, it was as if lightning played over the human and the orc. Varian stumbled over a corpse. Garrosh chopped downward, intending to cleave him in two. The king rolled to the side, came up, and lunged. Now it was Garrosh's turn to retreat. He kept Gorehowl up, saving his throat twice, then used the hefty reach the axe provided him to stave off Varian until the orc was able to regain his footing. Once more, sword and axe joined together. Garrosh sought to catch the
blade with the curve of Gorehowl's head, but Varian withdrew the point at the last moment. He then tried to drive under the warchief's defenses, only to have the orc block Shalamayne with the flat of the axe. "You only delay the inevitable!" shouted Garrosh. "The day of the Alliance is at an end! The Horde is Azeroth's future!" "The Horde should fear the end of day! With the end of day comes the night . . . and with the night comes the worgen . . . ," Varian retorted. The gap that had separated them from the other combatants around them closed at that moment. Warriors locked in desperate combat flowed into the pair, pressing them into one another. The eyes of the human and the orc met long, and both saw death in the other's gaze. "Pray to your spirits," the king flatly stated. "I shall do so. You'll need a proper guide to the afterlife, human. . . ." With a roar, Garrosh shoved as hard as he could. Varian slammed into those behind him. The warchief cut a savage arc, Gorehowl's mournful cry sending those closest scattering again. Varian cut off the cry with Shalamayne, first deflecting the axe, then using a twist of his wrist to enable the sword to bring the orc's weapon to the side. With his fist, Garrosh hammered the human's shoulder. Varian gritted his teeth as his bones shook. Seeking to stop the attack, he brought his blade between his shoulder and the pounding fist. The warchief swung at his other, now-unprotected shoulder. Varian tossed Shalamayne to his other hand, then tilted the blade toward Gorehowl. But although he kept Gorehowl from crushing his shoulder, the axe still cut across the upper arm. The king grunted in renewed pain as he shifted away. Shalamayne avenged him quickly. Varian had long ago learned to wield his sword with either hand, although one would always be favored over the other. Garrosh reacted too slowly to the fact that his human foe could handle Shalamayne well even now. The tip of the sword drew a red line along the warchief's chest just below the throat. Suddenly another axe entered the fray. One of the Kor'kron had reached the struggle and, in keeping with his duties, sought to protect Garrosh. The guard threw himself bodily toward Varian, his unexpected intervention leaving the king in desperate straits.
Another Kor'kron came at Varian from the opposite direction. Their axes were not Gorehowl, but they were well bloodied and wielded by expert hands. The Kor'kron slashed and swung, pushing Varian back. Garrosh growled angrily at his guards, but his words were drowned by the battle. Both Kor'kron looked upon Varian with malevolent eagerness: with his death they would not only serve their warchief but also bring acclaim upon themselves. The lord of Stormwind read their reflexes, recognized their moves. He let one guard press ahead of the other. As the first Kor'kron's anticipation of striking the fatal blow rose, Varian shifted his grip on Shalamayne and threw it like a spear. Caught unawares by the unorthodox maneuver, the foremost guard left himself open. The force of Varian's throw sent the blade deep into his foe. Before the second Kor'kron could make sense of matters, Varian had snatched away the dying guard's axe. With the full force of his might, he swung at his other adversary's leg. The axe all but separated the limb. Screaming, the orc fell to one side. Varian plucked Shalamayne free, then skewered the wounded Kor'kron. Why Garrosh had not pursued his two guards became evident as the orc buried Gorehowl in the skull of a riderless nightsaber. The cat did not die immediately, its sharp claws seeking one last time to tear the orc to shreds. But with agility more remarkable due to his broad form, Garrosh evaded the feline's paw, then moved in and for a second time let Gorehowl bite into the nightsaber's skull. The warchief turned his dripping axe to Varian. Without a word the pair renewed their duel. Blood from those who had gotten in their way splattered the human and the orc, but neither paid attention to anything but the other. Horns sounded. Alliance horns. They grew more dominating, though Garrosh did not notice that. What he did notice was that his breathing was growing more ragged. He had expected to slay Varian Wrynn by now and raise the human's severed head for all the hapless Alliance to see. Because of that, he had exerted himself harder than he usually did. But this human has come an impossible distance! the orc angrily reminded himself. He should be the weary one! He should be unable to even lift his sword. . . . Varian, though, looked as fresh of energy as he had when first they had met.
The human's eyes remained unwavering. Garrosh realized that he had far underestimated the human. This king possessed the fury of an orc and, through him, the defenders seemed to have gained that fury as well. And only then did the warchief truly see that the stories he had heard about Varian Wrynn were true. Lo'Gosh did smile with favor on this human . . . and why not? They were of a kind. Here was one who had the heart of a great and determined hunter, a great and determined warrior. The heart . . . of a wolf. I have been a fool! the warchief knew then. I should've planned an even greater, more brutal thrust! With such a leader, the Alliance may even take eastern Ashenvale back! Unmindful of what went on in his adversary's thoughts, Varian further pressed his attack. He saw Garrosh give ground and knew that the orc did not do so as part of some sinister strategy. The advantage had turned to Varian's. Varian slashed. It was an attack a weary Garrosh knew that he could parry, but his arm moved a fraction slower than it was wont. Shalamayne dug into the upper arm, striking tensed muscle. Garrosh's entire arm shook. The warchief's grip momentarily failed. Gorehowl slipped from his twitching fingers and fell to the ground. Varian pulled back to strike-and an ear-shattering roar overwhelmed both fighters. Varian and Garrosh looked up to see another magnataur come rushing down on them. Worgen scurried over his body as he sought to escape their savage attacks. The worgen had taken Varian's tactics to heart and had improved on them, for as the behemoth reached the pair, his ravaged front legs gave out and he pitched forward. Varian threw himself back. With his good hand, Garrosh risked life and limb to seize Gorehowl. As the shadow of the plummeting magnataur rushed over him, he leapt. The stricken monster rolled to one side, but the worgen only clambered to safer ground, then resumed their relentless shredding. The hind legs kicked wildly, forcing Varian to back farther away. Garrosh pushed himself to his feet. He searched for the human, but the struggling magnataur blocked his view. Rage refueling his strength, the warchief began running to the back of the
beast. He would find Varian Wrynn again and this time there would be a decisive- "Warchief!" Another of his Kor'kron stepped in front of him. Garrosh tried to shove the fool aside, but suddenly other hands seized him. "Beware!" shouted another guard. Two others stepped in to protect their leader as several worgen atop the magnataur took interest in fresher meat. "Get the warchief away!" As some of his personal guard battled the worgen, a furious Garrosh roared, "Release me, you damned fools! I must find him! I will have his death . . . and claim the sword!" "The battle is lost!" the first Kor'kron dared to say. "We must get you from here before we're overrun!" Garrosh rewarded the speaker with the back of his hand. As blood dribbled down the guard's mouth, the warchief roared, "The next coward to speak such lies loses his dishonorable head!" "No lies!" proclaimed another. Several heads bobbed in agreement. "All but one magnataur are down. Our lines have disappeared. On our south, we are among the enemy already. You but have to look and see. If I lie, my head is yours!" "Mine also!" said the first, with the rest following suit. Such offers were not given lightly, not with the great possibility that Garrosh would accept. The warchief frowned, then surveyed what he could of the struggle. It took no imagination to quickly see that they were right. The banners of the Sentinels could be seen edging closer. His own warriors' banners were little in view, and most of those could be seen farther and farther east. The rest lay no doubt trampled under the enemy's feet. "No! I will find him even if I must fight every foe on the field! I will not lose. . . . " He tried to go in hunt of Varian again, only to have his own guards seize him and begin to drag him to safety. "We will win Ashenvale yet," the lead Kor'kron assured him as the guards continued their struggle to save Garrosh. "The warchief himself says that one battle is not a war!" reminded another. "We will take Ashenvale! We swear it, Warchief. . . ." Garrosh fought with himself to accept what they said. They were repeating
what he had always proclaimed to them. Yet, the reality was bitter to swallow . . . especially after the unfinished duel with Varian Wrynn. He shook free of his fearful guards, but, to their relief, headed to the mounts to which they had been steering him. In their wake, the battle still raged, though it was clear that the Alliance continued to gain ground. "Sound the horns," Garrosh ordered. "Sound the retreat." A relieved guard signaled a trumpeter, who did as commanded. As the hated sound reverberated in his mind, Garrosh mounted. He swung Gorehowl once, listened to it wail as he did, then hooked it onto a brace on his back. Just before Garrosh urged his mount on, he looked over his shoulder to where the first elements of the Horde were abandoning the lost cause. "It is but a battle," the warchief finally agreed. "Only a battle. Ashenvale is our destiny. . . . " Garrosh envisioned again the realm he would build and, in envisioning it, once more knew that it would happen. He led them off, already making plans. This was not over . . . not until he had won. . . . And not until Varian Wrynn was dead.
Varian watched the riders fade in the distance, aware that he could have pursued but had chosen not to do so. Genn Greymane found him near the great corpse of the magnataur who had separated the human from the orc. The worgen leader's fur was slick with blood and other gore, as was that of every other of his people. "You let them go . . . ," the king of Gilneas muttered. "I saw you come around and watch the orcs take their warchief and all but carry him off. He fought them so much, we could've easily caught up and taken them. This would've all been over." Varian continued to watch even after he could no longer see Garrosh. He shook his head as he replied, "Would it have? Not at this point. No . . . sometimes you have to let the prey run for a while. Then . . . then you'll know when the right time does come." Genn's ears flattened as he tried to accept what Varian said. He was saved the trouble by the sudden arrival of a contingent of Sentinels led by both the high priestess and General Shandris. "Varian Wrynn," Tyrande greeted, smiling. "Elune finally reveals her
miracle." "'Her miracle'?" Genn cocked his head. "No, my lady, Elune might have some part in this-as surely Goldrinn has-but both would without a doubt give the greatest credit to another!" He extended a clawed hand toward Varian. "A warrior now in balance with himself, a leader now in harmony with the needs of those he commands!" The worgen leader turned to the others. "Varian Wrynn!" As the worgen leader shouted out the name, the other Gilneans began to pick it up. At first they murmured the name, but as their enthusiasm rose, they repeated it louder and louder. "Varian Wrynn! Varian Wrynn!" Having already rallied to that name as a battle cry, the Sentinels and the other Alliance fighters readily joined in again. Varian Wrynn did not enjoy such acclamation, but he understood the need for those cheering him to have this outlet. Varian only prayed that it would die down soon. If he hoped for help from the high priestess, he did not find it there. Still smiling, Tyrande nodded to Genn and said, "You speak right indeed." She bowed her head to the uncomfortable Varian, raised her hand, and said loudly, "Hail to you, King Varian! Hail to you, savior of Ashenvale . . . and perhaps Azeroth as well. . . ."
29
TO FORGE A FUTURE
Under the guidance of General Shandris, new and better-situated outposts were quickly arranged along the eastern edge of the territory under Sentinel protection. A much more tempered Denea was given command of one of these, and Su'ura Swiftarrow, while still battlemaster for Warsong Gulch, was promoted to replace the late, honored Haldrissa. A commission was also offered to Illiyana Moonblaze, but she preferred no higher rank, as it would mean more responsibility-and less independence. The Horde had shored up its defenses beyond the river, but the Alliance had reclaimed Silverwing and quickly rebuilt it. The Sentinel outpost had been made the staging ground for supplying the Alliance's counterattack. Tyrande blessed the restored Silverwing in the name of Elune before she and Shandris returned out of necessity to Darnassus. They did not return alone.
"It is a wonder we were able to call them all back," Malfurion commented as they watched the other representatives of the Alliance gathering for a new summit. "I commend you, my love." "Do not commend me. With the Horde still active in Ashenvale, it is more necessary than ever that we all come together. Garrosh will not sit long. He bides his time: that is all." "It still took much to get them to come. I know that they had already agreed to send troops to Ashenvale, but we both understand that there is more involved if we hope to keep the Horde in check for more than a short time." He
hugged her. "As I said, you are to be commended." She accepted his hug, only after that explaining, "But it was not I who truly convinced them . . . it was Varian." "Varian?" Before she could say more, both noticed a figure standing quietly in the shadows to their side. When he realized that they saw him, he finally stepped forward. It was Jarod, his wounds recently healed by the Sisters of Elune. However, despite now being in excellent condition again, the expression on his face was akin to a man who had just learned that he was to die. "High Priestess, forgive me . . . if you can." "I will not forgive you for calling me high priestess, Jarod Shadowsong . . . I am Tyrande to you. As for what I think you are apologizing for, do not." Her own expression saddened. "I am more at fault here than anyone. Poor Maiev! I should have seen how the madness was slowly consuming her! I am only grateful that you and my husband were able to prevent further catastrophe!" "But she escaped." "And no one holds that against you, Jarod," Malfurion interjected. "Especially us." He stood straighter. "Nevertheless, I swear to both of you that I will find her. She must be brought to justice and it must be by me." "Just be careful that you do not begin to follow the same path of obsession your sister did," Malfurion cautioned. "I understand what you say. I will be careful in that regard, but I will not shirk from my duty." The high priestess acquiesced. "No one can deny you that right, and you have proven your abilities, Jarod . . . which brings me to my first point. Not all of the Watchers were surely aware of Maiev's plot, and from among those proven innocent I intend to have a new leader appointed. However, the Watchers will play a different role than what we need from you, Jarod." "Me? I do not understand." "Once, you ably commanded warriors-and even demigods-in battle for us. With my husband's agreement, I would have you lead a new security force, one designed to deal with troubles . . . such as Maiev." "I am honored . . . and will gratefully accept." "Shalasyr would be very proud of you, Jarod," the high priestess added.
He tried to reply, but could not find his voice. Shalasyr's face filled his thoughts, and, for a moment, Jarod forgot that Tyrande and Malfurion stood before him. "I . . . like to think so," he finally answered. "I can only hope so. She was so much more full of life than me. She should have been the one to live on." "The choice is not ours. How we honor those who have passed on with the way we continue our lives is." "You sound like Shalasyr." The high priestess put a comforting hand on his shoulder. "In regards to Maiev, Shandris will assist you in choosing from among the Sentinels some possible candidates for your new force." "I thank all three of you." "We will talk more after this." "I will not let you down." Jarod bowed, then quickly stepped away. As Tyrande and Malfurion headed toward the summit, Malfurion leaned close and whispered, "Sending him to Shandris? What are you doing?" "Thinking of the future . . . ," she replied with a thoughtful smile, "and when the time is more appropriate for them." He held back any further comment as they entered among the representatives. Malfurion noted the swiftness with which the last emissaries sat and knew that it could only mean that Varian Wrynn had arrived. Sure enough, Tyrande surreptitiously touched his hand. He glanced her way and in doing so found Varian striding to his place among the others as if he were not the one who had succeeded in bringing them together again. The king of Stormwind sat down, then looked to Malfurion. The archdruid took his cue. Stepping forth, he raised his staff. Silence filled the gathering. "We thank you for coming here and again being our guests," he told them as Tyrande stood next to him. "With the events in Ashenvale, time has grown more precious, and so, if there is no objection, there is one among you who would speak and who, I believe, should be heard." With one hand, he indicated Varian. "I present to all of you, King Varian Wrynn of Stormwind. . . ." The other rulers and representatives began to applaud, but Varian waved them to silence. He studied them all, then shook his head. "You shouldn't be applauding me. Not a man who is supposed to rule by
reason but did so by rage instead." His self-condemnation brought concerned murmuring from his audience. Malfurion looked to Tyrande, who smiled in reassurance. "An unreasoning, unfocused rage that brought calamity on me and all I held dear and served only to divide the Alliance"-Varian's expression forbade anyone to deny what he said-"and for the latter, I apologize." It was no small thing for Varian to apologize for anything, and no one there thought him any weaker for it. The story of his actions in Ashenvale was already becoming legend despite his desiring otherwise. "The Varian Wrynn who reigned with such rage is dead!" he declared. "But in dying, he learned that it wasn't the rage that was at fault, only he! The fury, the anger, must have purpose! It must be the righteous anger of one defending his family, his home, and his friends! It must be the fury that keeps all he loves safe from those who would rip them from him. . . ." "Hear, hear!" rumbled an enthusiastic Thargas Anvilmar. The other dwarves glanced in his direction, but out of what seemed more satisfaction with his response than annoyance. "And now is the time to focus that fury!" the lord of Stormwind continued without pause. "Now is when we need the worgen most, not only for their own fury and fire, but to help guide all of us to safely and rightly unleash this side of us! This is our only way to defeat the Horde and, I will say it, perhaps even bring down the terrible black dragon Deathwing himself!" Malfurion finally understood where Varian was heading and nodded. Tyrande leaned close and murmured, "You see? We had faith it would work out and it did." "You had faith. I am still learning." At that moment, the king of Stormwind slammed his fist down. "The Horde has tried once to take Ashenvale! They'll try again! If we let them do so without a fight, we've already lost! They see Azeroth as a new world and, because of their relentless energy, they see themselves as the only ones appropriate to tame it! But we will match that energy and more, and we will fight the Horde and all other foes at every turn until the Alliance and Azeroth can finally claim that peace prevails!" This statement brought more murmuring, this time angry. Yet, beneath that anger was a growing agreement, a joining of purpose among the factions.
Archmage Tervosh nodded to Drukan, who bobbed his head in return. Gelbin and the gnomes muttered together, their gazes continuing to return to Varian with obvious admiration-a rare display by gnomes for someone who was a warrior, not an inventor. Everywhere, Varian's words struck home, for the moment bringing together even all three dwarven clans. Encouraged by their reactions, Varian thrust on. "Anger. Fury. You feel it now. This is what we need, if we're to match the energy of the Horde! This . . . and something more. . . ." Varian signaled to someone unseen near the entrance through which the representatives had again marched. A horn blared . . . and the anthem of Gilneas played. Led again by Genn Greymane and fully transformed to their astonishing lupine shapes, the worgen reentered. They spread out as they reached the center, displaying their might for all to see. Fist on his chest in a salute, the worgen leader stood directly before Varian. He gazed up at his counterpart and waited. Varian did not look back but instead addressed the audience as a whole again. "When last we were here, the archdruid sought a vote on full membership of Gilneas and the worgen by acclamation! I call on you today to recast your vote! What say the rest of you?" "Aye!" shouted Kurdran. "Aye!" the other dwarven representatives yelled immediately after. A stately female draenei rose. "I am Ishanah, high priestess of the Aldor, chosen to speak in place of the Prophet! The draenei cast a vote of aye!" Theramore and the rest of the Alliance factions followed, each repeating their earlier votes. Malfurion hugged Tyrande with one arm as they watched the acclamation build. They made no attempt to take command of the summit; this was Varian's gathering until he deemed otherwise. The king surveyed the assembly, which watched him in anticipation. "Stormwind votes aye!" Varian bellowed triumphantly. "Gilneas and the worgen are full members of the Alliance!" The worgen let out howls of pleasure. From beyond the gathering, other howls arose from the direction of their encampment. Only Genn Greymane did not howl. The worgen leader stood solemn before Varian. "You honor us!" the king of Gilneas declared. "But we also honor you,
Varian Wrynn of Stormwind! We honor the champion of Ashenvale!" Now both the worgen and the other assembled delegates cheered. Malfurion finally left Tyrande to go to the lord of Stormwind. Varian gratefully let him take over, but first indicated that he had something to whisper to the archdruid. "When we arrived, there was a missive brought by a draenei messenger from my son. He wanted to assure me that when he completed his own path with the Light, he would return to Stormwind. . . . " Varian eyed Malfurion suspiciously. "Is this some doing of yours or the high priestess's?" "None whatsoever. This happy news is from Anduin himself, I assure you! I knew nothing about this until you now told me, and I can swear the same for Tyrande. She would not have kept such a thing from me, much less you. . . ." The king exhaled. "Then that makes his promise all the more welcome!" Varian continued to drink in the thought of his son's return as the archdruid, after a congratulatory touch on the human's shoulder, took over. However, if Varian thought his part at an end, he was sorely mistaken. "Gilneas and the worgen are welcomed into the fold!" the night elf called. "And the worgen are welcome to a new, permanent home here with the night elf people!" The worgen howled their gratitude and the emissaries and their retinues added their applause again. When things had settled down, Malfurion continued, "But we must also welcome the man who has brought us together again and who has also brought the future of the Alliance sharply into focus at last! Varian Wrynn, king of Stormwind!" There was no cry of disagreement, not even from the Dark Iron dwarves. To a member, the Alliance factions called out the king of Stormwind's name over and over. Varian wanted nothing more than to step back, but instead it was as if his body responded in the reverse, for he found himself moving up next to the night elf. The assembly continued to cry out, "Varian! Varian!" The subject of their acclaim shook his head in denial, but no one seemed to care about his opinion. He did not see when Malfurion slipped away to Tyrande again. Varian stood staring back at those who thought of him as not only champion of Ashenvale, but also their very future. He stared at them . . . and knew that he could never
be the Varian that he had been in times past. Never again would he be able to turn from his allies for the mistakes that they had made, not when Varian could at last see how theirs were so insignificant compared to his own. "I will do what I can . . . ," he whispered. "I swear I will . . . Anduin." And behind him, the archdruid and high priestess watched the events with more than a little satisfaction. "You were right, Tyrande," Malfurion commented. "This is potentially even more than I imagined. . . . He could very well guide the Alliance to new, fresh heights, just what it needs to compete with the Horde for this Azeroth we have all inherited from Deathwing's madness. . . ." "New, fresh heights," she agreed. "Perhaps even . . . a new age?" The archdruid frowned. "If the Horde can be defeated. And if Deathwing does not rise anew and unveil some even more heinous plot, as you and I both suspect the accursed dragon intends. . . ." She touched his cheek in some concern. "You must find some gladness in today's events. I thought you did." "I do . . . I do . . . I find-" The archdruid stopped, all thought of their discussion for the moment pushed aside. He stared at Varian Wrynn, who now had taken to heart the summit and spoke to the others of what they needed to do next in terms of Ashenvale and beyond. At the same time, Varian Wrynn felt a presence surround him, a presence that stirred his confidence in his decision. He did not have to ask who that presence was. It could only be one being. And from his position, Malfurion watched as, for the briefest of moments, the form of Goldrinn-Lo'Gosh-superimposed itself over Varian. Malfurion was no overimaginative sort; he knew that the vision he had seen was neither a product of his troubled mind nor a trick of his eyes. The archdruid glanced at Tyrande. "Yes," she murmured. "You see true. Goldrinn chose well his champion. . . . They are of a kind. The wolf Ancient: it was said that in the early days of the world he used to howl his fury against the moons, against Elune. Perhaps, through this choice, he has redeemed himself in the eyes of Elune as well." She studied the human. "Such a choice! Varian Wrynn truly has the spirit, the heart of the wolf . . . and all our hope for the future. . . ." Seeing that-and hearing Tyrande's words-Malfurion Stormrage felt a
sudden weight lifted from his own soul. He was very aware that mortality would claim him at some point, perhaps even sooner than he prayed. Since that realization, the archdruid had not been able to shake his fear of the tremendous burden on those who would follow him . . . those who would not have him to help protect them. But now Malfurion saw his great hubris. He should not have worried. It seemed as if Azeroth itself would find the ones who would next take up the banner, doing what they could to preserve their world and even perhaps finally forging a true, lasting peace. And whoever they were, wherever they came from, Varian Wrynn, scion of the wolf Ancient, would be there to guide them


Six Years Before the Fall
THE ANCIENT DARKNESS SURROUNDING HIM DID NOT stop him from seeing any more than his lack of eyes did. He had been a sorcerer once, a very great one. His spectral sight revealed every inch of his cell with far more clarity than eyes of flesh ever could. He could navigate this prison even without it. He knew every flagstone on the floor, every enchantment that bound him. He knew them by sight, by touch. He knew the way his footsteps would echo with every one of the nine steps it took him to pace across the chamber. He felt the flows of magic all around. Spell after spell, enchantment after enchantment, their soul-crushing power intended to do only one thing: make sure he stayed buried here, unremembered, unforgiven. The ones who incarcerated him intended this place to be his tomb. They had forgotten about him over the long millennia. They should have killed him. It would have been kinder. Instead they let him live, pretending it was mercy. It let those who had bound him-such as his brother, Malfurion Stormrage, and Tyrande Whisperwind, the woman he loved-feel better about themselves. Long centuries had dragged by when he never heard the voice of another living thing. Only his jailors, the Watchers, spoke to him occasionally, and he had learned to hate them. Most of all he had come to abhor their leader, Warden Maiev Shadowsong. She visited him more than any other, still afraid he would escape despite all the precautions his captors had taken. Once, she had wanted him dead. Now it was her task in life to ensure he stayed imprisoned, when everyone else had forgotten him. What was that? A faint tremor in the ring of binding spells?
Impossible. There was no escape from this place. Not even death. Spells healed any harm he might inflict on himself. Magic kept him alive without need for water or food. Those bonds had been woven by masters, drawn so tight, intertwined so deeply, that they could be undone only by those who had buried him alive. And they would never do that. They were too afraid to let him go free. Justifiably so. He had brooded for centuries on what he would do to those who had incarcerated him. Time was the only thing he had. The span of his imprisonment dwarfed all the years he had been free. If he had not been who he was, he would have gone mad. Perhaps he had. How many thousands of years had it been since he was imprisoned? He had lost track. That was the worst of it. Millennia spent in darkness, trapped in this cage, unable to take more than nine steps in any direction. He who had once hunted demons across the trackless wildernesses of Azeroth had been confined in a place he would not have left an animal. They had sentenced him to this when all he had done was try to overcome their common foe. He had infiltrated the Burning Legion, his people's-no, his world's-sworn enemy. He had tried to undo the harm the demonic invaders had wreaked. Had he been rewarded for it? No! He had been buried alive. His people had assumed him to be a traitor, a betrayer. They had hailed him as a hero once, but no one did that now. If he was remembered at all, his name would be a curse. Was that the sound of weapons clashing? He pushed the thought aside. Refused to let hope well up within his breast. There was no one out there who wanted him free. His family and his friends had turned against him when he had tried to re-create the Well of Eternity, the night elves' ancient fount of magic, on Mount Hyjal. The only ones who might want him to escape were demons. His jailors would kill him rather than let that happen. And as long as the wards remained in place, there was nothing he could do to stop them. But there it was again. Another tremor in the flows of magic around him. The weaves of power that had bound him all this time were weakening. He raised his hands in front of his face, flexed his fingers, reached out to draw upon the magic. For the first time in millennia, something responded, a trickle so weak that he thought he might be imagining it. He called on his twin blades, the Warglaives of Azzinoth. They had been displayed
triumphantly on weapon racks outside his cell, taunting him, but now the ancient soulbindings linking them to him caused the potent weapons to materialize in his hands. Power flowed through them, illumining the runes on their blades. His heart beat faster. His mouth felt dry. There was a chance of freedom after all. He clutched the warglaives tight. In the past, they had killed demons. Now they would kill elves. The thought did not disturb him as once it would have. He would even take pleasure in it. Again his magical shackles flickered. The sounds of combat came closer. Some of the bindings had failed. Perhaps they were desecrated by spilled blood or ruined by the spells he sensed being unleashed in the battle. Energy poured into him as his bonds frayed. His heart pounded. His flesh tingled. He felt as if he might exhale fire. After such long abstinence, the flow of power was almost overwhelming. He sensed a presence outside the doorway of his cell. He prepared himself to attack. A voice spoke, and it was the last one he had expected to hear. "Illidan, is that you?" Tyrande Whisperwind asked. All his dreams of vengeance, all his plans for retribution, faded away, as if the long years of his imprisonment had never happened. He was astonished by the feeling; he had thought himself hardened against anything and anyone -especially her. His speech was rusty after decades of disuse. "Tyrande ... it is you! After all these ages spent in darkness, your voice is like the pure light of the moon upon my mind." He cursed himself for his weakness. These were not the words he had imagined saying in his dreams of freedom and escape. Yet they rose unbidden to his lips, hope welling in his chest. Perhaps she had seen the error of what she had done. Perhaps she had come to free him, to forgive him. "The Legion has returned, Illidan. Your people have need of you once more." His fists clenched around his weapons. "My people need me? My people left me to rot!" His throat constricted with rage, choking off more words. The demons had returned, as he had always known they would, and his people wanted his aid. Molten anger blazed through him, creating a great void in its wake, and more power flowed in to fill the emptiness. No doubt about it-the spells binding him were weakened. By her actions,
by the loosening of her will, Tyrande had helped undo them. He concentrated all his fury and all his pent-up frustration into one mighty spell of unraveling. For a moment the weakened chains of magic held, but only for a moment. Rivers of power eroded the barriers around him. Slowly at first, but ever faster, the imprisoning spells crumbled. He smashed through the bars of his cell, tearing apart the stone. Tyrande stood there, beautiful as ever, staring at Illidan. The years had not changed her. She was still tall, with pale-violet skin and blue hair, graceful as a temple dancer and lovely as a moonrise over Nordrassil. She reeked of blood and unleashed magic. She must have seen his rage, for she turned away, unable to meet his gaze. That hurt more than anything, to see her cringe after all the long years since last they had met. "Because I once cared for you, Tyrande, I will hunt down the demons and topple the Legion." He bared his teeth in a snarl. "But I will never owe our people anything!" She met his gaze this time. Emotions flickered over her face. Hope. Fear. Was that pity or regret? He was not sure and he despised himself for placing so much value on what she thought. What she felt meant nothing to him! Nothing! Tyrande said, "Then let us hurry back to the surface! The demons' corruption spreads with every second we waste." And that was it. All the greeting he was going to get after the long, wasted millennia. No apologies. No remorse. She had helped cast him into this dreadful place, and now she needed his aid. And the worst of it was that he would give it.
* * *
BODIES LAY STREWN OUTSIDE his cell. It was clear that there had been a mighty battle here and that Tyrande had fought her way in to free him. She must be desperate indeed to perform such an act. Looking down at the massive carcass of the keeper of the grove, he realized that if the Burning Legion had returned, she had reason to be. The Legion destroyed worlds the way armies destroyed cities. "Did you slay him?" Illidan asked, pointing at the dead body of Califax. "I did," said Tyrande. "The keeper of the grove would not let you loose."
Illidan laughed. "Maiev will be angry. He was one of her favorites." Tyrande's face flushed. "This is not a reason for laughter," she said. "I have had little enough cause for mirth in the thousands of years since you imprisoned me. Forgive me if my sense of humor seems a little warped." "Ten thousand," she said. "What?" "It has been more than ten thousand years since you were imprisoned." The laughter died on his lips. The weight of her words pressed down on him like the weight of the earth above their heads. "So long," he said, his voice soft. He looked at the ancient vault of his prison, traced the weave of the spells that had held him. He lengthened his stride, determined to leave this place and never come back. "Why did you really set me free?" he asked, still hoping that she might show some shred of remorse about what she had done. "As I said, the Burning Legion has returned. No one knows more about them than you. No one has slain more demons." "You do not fear my treachery, then? Remember, I am called the Betrayer." "Betrayer you were, but in the end you chose the right side." He gestured at his surroundings with one tattooed hand. "And look what it got me." "You could be dead. Like so many of our people." "Our people. You keep harping on about our people. They are not our people. They are your people." "Do you hate us so?" "Yes," he said. His lip twisted into a sneer. "But fortunately for you, I hate the demons more." She nodded as if he had confirmed something she wanted to hear. A suspicion flickered through his mind. He had been imprisoned not from any false act of mercy, but because she had known that one day he would again be needed. He had been stored here like a weapon hung in an armory. Ahead he sensed a being of enormous-and familiar-power, his brother. He might have known that wherever Tyrande was, her lover, Malfurion, would be close by. Illidan's whole body tensed, prepared to spring into battle. His companion sensed it as well. She rushed forward and then halted, barred by the mighty presence of the archdruid Malfurion Stormrage.
Illidan's brother was massive. Antlers protruded from his head. His handsome face held a look of dismay at seeing Illidan free. Clearly the archdruid had not come to aid Tyrande. Four Druids of the Claw flanked Malfurion, each in the form of a bear. They flexed their taloned paws and growled at Illidan. They had been set here to guard against his escape, and they seemed determined still to prevent it. Tyrande said, "Mal!" Illidan fought to keep his anger in check. Here was the brother who had condemned him. His words, when he found them, were bitter. "It has been an eternity, Brother. An eternity spent in darkness!" Malfurion met his gaze evenly. "You were sentenced to pay for your sins, nothing more." The hypocrisy of it was breathtaking. What sort of brother could condemn his own flesh and blood to ten thousand years entombed? "And who were you to judge me? We fought the demons side by side, if you recall!" Tension crackled in the air between them. In that moment, they were both ready to fight, to kill. Tyrande shouted, "Enough of this, both of you! What is done is done." She focused the full force of her attention on Malfurion. "My love, with Illidan's help, we will drive the demons back once again and save what is left of our beloved land!" Malfurion shook his head. "Have you even considered the cost, Tyrande? This betrayer's aid may doom us all before the end. I will have nothing to do with this." Illidan schooled his face to impassivity. His own brother obviously still thought of him as nothing but a monster, a puppet for the Legion. He would show him. He would show them all that the demons had no power over him. "Cower in your weakness and indecision, then, Brother, but do so elsewhere," Illidan said. "I have work to do. And little time to do it in." Illidan sent forth a burst of energy from the power he had been steadily regaining, tossing those assembled around him into the stone walls. He strode past the dazed forms and out of his prison, knowing in his heart that before this was over, he would be named Betrayer once more, and he would deserve it. He was never going to be imprisoned again.
CHAPTER ONE Four Years Before the Fall
GREEN METEORS RIPPED THROUGH THE DARK clouds that perpetually obscured the heavens over Shadowmoon Valley. The ground shook as the monstrously ornate demonic siege engines on the walls of the Black Temple rained death down on the blood elf forces of Prince Kael'thas Sunstrider, strewing the red earth of Outland with their corpses. Despite their losses, the elves pushed forward, determined to take the citadel of Magtheridon, lord of Outland, the Burning Legion's satrap in this shattered world. Illidan paused for a moment and studied the Black Temple. To inexperienced eyes, the defenses might look immeasurably strong, but he saw that they had been neglected. There were too few sentries for the span of the towering walls, the warding spells were starting to unravel, and the metal struts of the gates were stained with rust and verdigris. The defenders responded slowly, as if they could not quite believe they were being assaulted by a force so much smaller than their own. Perhaps they expected to be relieved by demonic allies. If so, they were doomed to disappointment. Illidan and his companions had spent the whole long, hot Outland day sealing the gates through which the demons were summoned. No aid was coming from that source. Illidan glanced over at Prince Kael'thas. "Magtheridon has grown strong over the years, but he has had few real foes to contend with. He has become decadent and complacent. The boisterous cur cannot match our cunning or our will." The tall, fair blood elf prince looked up at him. The fierce joy of combat blazed in his eyes. "This will be a glorious battle, master. Though Magtheridon's forces vastly outnumber ours, your soldiers are prepared to fight to the end."
Illidan hoped that would not prove necessary. He needed to seize the Black Temple and mastery of Outland quickly if he was to make himself secure against the vengeance of the demon lord Kil'jaeden. Kil'jaeden had set Illidan a task after he rejoined the Burning Legion-to destroy the Frozen Throne and hence eliminate a rebellious servant-and he had not completed it. The Deceiver did not reward failure. Illidan believed that closing the demonic portals could thwart Kil'jaeden's attempts to locate him. Winning this fortress would give him a stronger base of operations for keeping the portals closed. An elven sorcerer raised his hand and sent a bolt of arcane energy lancing toward the walls. Badly maintained or not, the defenses were enough to prevent it from striking the siege engine. A ball of fire arced down toward the mage, gouging the blood-red earth as the defenders sought his range. A company of Kael'thas's soldiers raced past en route to the shelter of the walls. Illidan clenched his fists as he sensed the demons within the temple. Here in the foreign world of Outland, he felt the temptation of demonic magic even more strongly than usual, especially after he had consumed the potency within the Skull of Gul'dan. The surge of evil energy from that artifact had transformed him, changing both his physical form and the depth of his power, but it had put him off balance for months. He flexed his newly gained demonic wings, earning a concerned glance from Prince Kael'thas. Illidan took a deep breath and forced himself to be calm. It was a long, strange road that had brought him to this pass. Since Tyrande had freed him, he had seen the overthrow of the Burning Legion on his homeworld of Azeroth, made a pact with a demon lord, and fled to Outland to evade his enemies, both night elven and demonic. He had been recaptured by his old nemesis, Maiev, and then freed by his allies, the young prince Kael'thas-whose allegiance Illidan had earned by pledging to help the blood elves sate their addiction to magic-and Lady Vashj, a leader of the naga. Now he found himself scheming to overthrow the pit lord who ruled this shattered world in the name of the Burning Legion. Kael'thas stared at him, expecting an answer to his promise of loyalty. Illidan said, "I am pleased by your people's zeal, young Kael. Their spirits and powers have been honed in this harsh wilderness. Their courage alone may be enough to-"
"Lord Illidan, new arrivals come to greet you." The voice of Lady Vashj cut him off as she slithered into view. Great bands of muscle pulsed and bulged as she moved, twisting the coils of her lower body. Her oddly beautiful face, reminiscent of a night elf's, contrasted with the horror of her serpentine form. Illidan turned to look in the direction she indicated. A pack of monstrous figures lumbered into view. Illidan recognized them at once. They were Broken, corrupted and devolved former members of the draenei race who had inhabited Draenor before it was shattered into Outland. They, too, were part of Illidan's coalition, bound to him by promises of aid against their common enemy, Magtheridon. The Broken were hulking, ungraceful monsters, bearing primitive weapons in their huge hands. Illidan's mystical senses detected that more of them were nearby, potent magic concealing them from those who lacked his spectral sight. One of the Broken, even more massive and twisted of form than the rest, limped forward on hoofed feet. "We have fought the orcs and their demon masters for generations," the figure said. His voice rasped from within his chest. It seemed to pain him to speak. "Now, at last, we will end their curse forever. We are yours to command, Lord Illidan." It was Akama, leader of the Broken. He was not a reassuring figure. Fangs jutted up from his lower jaw. Tentacles writhed out from the bottom half of his face. "You have arrived just in time," said Illidan. "Those machines on the walls must be silenced, and the gate must be opened." Akama nodded and gestured. The near-invisible Broken swarmed forward across the open ground and clambered up the walls of the Black Temple. A small force of blood elves and naga took shelter against the monstrous fortifications, beneath the firing arcs of the demonic engines. Illidan, Kael'thas, and Lady Vashj moved to join them, along with Akama and his bodyguards. Once again, the so-called lord of Outland's overconfidence was revealed. A properly prepared fortress would have vats of boiling oil or alchemical fire ready to pour down on attackers. The defenders did nothing. Long minutes ticked by. This close to the walls, Illidan could hear the hum of the magical generators that powered the demonic war machines.
Suddenly the sounds of combat came from within the walls, and the great gates of the Black Temple swung open. Akama and his bodyguards raced forward to join the fray. Explosions sounded as the Broken destroyed the generators, and the war machines on the walls fell silent. The main bulk of the naga and blood elf force advanced toward the gate once more. Akama returned, hideous face jubilant. He had waited a long time for this day. Illidan smiled and said, "As I promised, your people shall have their vengeance, Akama. By night's end, we will all be drunk with it. Vashj, Kael, give the final order to strike. The hour of wrath has come!" Through the open gates, Illidan could see a vast courtyard stacked high with bones. Red-skinned fel orcs milled around in confusion as their leaders bellowed commands and tried to get them into some semblance of order to repel the invaders. Within the Black Temple, there were probably ten fel orcs for every one of Illidan's troops. Each had been twisted by foul magic into something far stronger and fiercer than a normal orc. It counted for nothing now. Illidan's forces swept into the courtyard, a tight wedge that cleaved through their disorganized enemy as easily as their blades sliced orcish flesh. Illidan plunged his talons into the chest of a fel orc. Bone crunched as he closed his fingers and ripped open a cavity to pull the heart free. The fel orc roared and lunged forward, jaws snapping in an attempt to tear out Illidan's throat even as the creature died. Illidan raised the corpse above his head and tossed it into the onrushing squad of red-skinned defenders. Its weight bowled them over, sending them tumbling to the ground. He leapt amid them, freeing his warglaives from their sheaths. He lashed out, striking to left and right with irresistible force. His enemies fell, decapitated, limbless, mutilated. Blood covered him. He licked it from his lips and moved forward, slashing and slicing as he went. All around, the dying screamed. Magic thundered as Prince Kael'thas and Lady Vashj unleashed their spells. Illidan was tempted to do so himself, but he wanted to preserve his strength for the final conflict with Magtheridon. Part of him took pleasure in the clash of arms. There was nothing quite like shedding the blood of your foes with your own hands. Deep within him, the chained demon part of his nature enjoyed feeding this way. The fel orcs fought well, but they were no match for Illidan and his comrades. The naga were much larger and more physically powerful. They
wrapped their enemies within their serpentine coils and squeezed the life out of them. The blood elves were masters of sorcery and swords. They might not be as strong as the fel orcs, but they were faster and more agile, and bonds of loyalty stronger than life itself drove them to defend their prince. The Broken fought with the determination of a people driven to free their homeland from the grip of demons. The howls of dying fel orcs rose to the heavens in protest as they dropped before the hungry blades of their enemies. Within minutes the courtyard was cleared, the fel orcs were routed, and the way into the Black Temple's inner citadel and Magtheridon's chambers lay open. "Victory is ours," said Akama. "The Temple of Karabor will belong to my people once again." "The temple will be returned to your people," Illidan said. He replaced his warglaives in their sheaths. "In good time." It was true. He fully intended to give back the Black Temple to the Broken. Once he had achieved his goals. Akama looked at him with rheumy eyes. He interlaced his stubby fingers and bobbed his head, his need to believe etched on his face. The Temple of Karabor had been the most sacred site of his people before Magtheridon's desecration turned it into the Black Temple. Illidan sensed it had a deep personal significance to the Broken himself. That was a string that could be tugged to make him dance, if the need arose. Not that what Akama wanted counted for anything. Illidan's purpose far outweighed the desires of any Broken. He had planned too long to let scruples stand in his way. "When we overcome the pit lord, most of his fel orc lieutenants will support us," Illidan said. "They follow the strongest, and we will have shown that their faith in Magtheridon was misplaced. Such summoned demons as remain within the temple will be bound in fealty to me, or they will die their final death." Vashj nodded. "Cut off the head and the body falls," she said. "You will slay Magtheridon, Lord?" Akama asked. Illidan allowed himself a cruel smile. "We shall do much worse than that," he said. "And what would that be?" Akama spoke slowly. Illidan heard the doubt in his voice. Clearly, Akama had reservations about what they were doing. "You will need to wait and see," Illidan said.
"As you wish, Lord," Akama said. "So shall it be." "Then let us be about our business," said Illidan. "We have a world to conquer."
* * *
THE DOORWAY TO THE throne room slid open. The stench of demon assaulted Illidan's nostrils. Flames leapt around Magtheridon's throne of bones. The pit lord loomed more than five times the height of a blood elf, a centaur-like creature with two arms and a quadruped lower half, as massive as a dragon. Magtheridon's legs were like the columns supporting the roof of some ancient temple. They lifted his underbelly so high that an elf could walk beneath it. In one huge hand, he held a glaive as long as the mast of an oceangoing ship, weighty as a battering ram. Flanking him were two gigantic, batwinged doomguard, each almost as tall as their master, and a force of lesser demons. Illidan sensed their power and their hostility. The pit lord turned his burning eyes upon Illidan. When he spoke, his voice was deep and guttural. "I do not know you, stranger, but your power is vast. Are you an agent of the Legion? Have you been sent here to test me?" Illidan laughed. "I have come to replace you. You are a relic, Magtheridon, a ghost of a past age. The future is mine. From this moment on, Outland and all its denizens will bow to me." The pit lord lumbered forward, raising his gigantic glaive. The earth shook beneath his tread. "I will crush you like the insect you are. I will feast upon your pulped flesh and devour your soul with it." He spoke with the overweening self-confidence of one who thought his might was unchallengeable. His demonic bodyguards advanced. Illidan sprang, warglaives scything through the air to bite into demon flesh. His blow slashed the arm from a felguard, forcing the creature to drop his axe. A heartbeat later Illidan's left-hand warglaive sliced his opponent open from neck to groin. Illidan's own forces advanced into the fray. The doomguard were mighty, but they were few. Buffeted by the spells of Kael'thas and Vashj and surrounded by assailants, the doomguard were slain like bears being dragged down by a pack of hounds.
Illidan bounded forward to confront Magtheridon himself. The pit lord's huge glaive crashed down, biting into the stone where Illidan had stood. He was already away, rolling between the lord of Outland's columnar legs, hamstringing each of the front ones with a double swipe of his blades. The pit lord roared with fury and struck again. Illidan tumbled forward under his foe's belly, drawing forth ichor with his strikes. He vaulted onto Magtheridon's massive tail, ran up his spine, and drove his blades into the demon's thick neck. From Illidan's vantage point, he could see that his forces had felled the pit lord's bodyguards. The demons were finished. Illidan raised his hands high and chanted the spell of binding. A wave of unleashed magical energy hit the pit lord. Magtheridon flinched as the spell began to bite. Illidan's heart thundered as he exerted his will. He felt as if he were engaged in a tug-of-war with a giant. Magtheridon's advance slowed. His face twisted as if he, too, felt the strain. "You are strong-for a mortal," the pit lord said. "I am not a mortal," said Illidan. "Anything that can be killed is mortal." Sweat beaded on Illidan's brow. His breath rasped from his chest. He spread his wings and rose into the air above Magtheridon, signaling the others. It was time. Lady Vashj nodded, raised her hands, and began to chant. Lines of fire blazed across Illidan's sight, forming intricate patterns around the pit lord. Magtheridon roared as he understood what was happening. Illidan fed more power into the spell. The pit lord stood transfixed, unable to proceed. His tombstone-sized fangs glistened, reflecting the light of magical energy. He reared up, fighting against the magic as much with his huge strength as with his own sorcerous might. Illidan strained against him and glanced at Prince Kael'thas. The blood elf licked his lips like an epicure catching sight of a feast. All this unleashed magic clearly aroused something within him. "Kael'thas," Illidan croaked. His words carried to the elf's ears. Kael'thas spread his arms and added his voice to the spell. Colossal magical energies smashed down. The spell locked into place. The pit lord screamed his rage and defiance, but to no avail. He was held by bindings so strong, not even he could overcome them. Illidan smiled. Victory was his. The first stage of his long-dreamed plan was complete.
* * *
AKAMA LISTENED AS LORD Illidan howled the final words of binding. Magtheridon stood frozen, impotent, and full of baffled rage. He flexed his mighty body, but he was held. It was done. The pit lord was vanquished. The defeat of Akama's people had been avenged. The Temple of Karabor would be free of the demon's baleful influence. Akama allowed himself a moment of triumph. His strength, combined with that of the outworld sorcerers, had been enough to overcome even so potent a demon as Magtheridon. Illidan descended to the ground. His wings snapped closed and slumped around his shoulders, and the glow faded from his magical tattoos. His arms dropped. Akama rushed to his side. "Victory is ours, oh lord," Akama said. "Yes, faithful Akama, it is," Illidan said. Was there a note of mockery in the way he stressed the word faithful? It mattered not. "You have freed the Temple of Karabor." "We have freed the Temple of Karabor." "May I ask when I may begin, Lord?" "Begin what?" A cold hand clutched at Akama's heart. He looked up at Illidan's face. He could not read the expression there. The demon hunter's features were a mask. A strip of runecloth concealed his empty eye sockets. Perhaps it was to be as Akama had feared all along. "We must purify the temple, Lord, and prepare it to be returned to holiness. My brethren and I will work day and night to finish the required rituals. It will be as if Magtheridon's vile touch never tainted this place." Illidan nodded slowly. "There will be time for that afterward." "Afterward, Lord Illidan?" "After my business is concluded. There is much to do before Outland is freed." "But the temple is free now, is it not, Lord?" "Nowhere is free while the Burning Legion reaches out for conquest. We must fortify this place. It must become a beacon to all who oppose the
demons." Akama swallowed his disappointment. He had been half expecting something like this. He let none of his thoughts show on his face. Instead he cast his eyes down and said, "It is, no doubt, as you say, Lord Illidan. May I withdraw and share the glad news with my people?" "You may," said Illidan. He paused for a moment and said, "The temple will be returned to the Broken, Akama. Just not today." "Of course, Lord. I do not doubt it." Akama hurried out of Magtheridon's throne room. He must prepare to travel. He had business with one who might be able to help. As he departed, he noticed that Prince Kael'thas's mocking gaze followed him. The prince had known all along what was going to happen. So had Lady Vashj. Fortunately, the Broken had not entirely trusted Illidan's benevolence. Akama had laid such contingency plans as had seemed wise when entering into any agreement with one known as the Betrayer. If the hunter of demons would not help him regain the Temple of Karabor, there were those who would. It was time to seek new allies. The holy place of Akama's people would be purified no matter what Illidan wanted.
* * *
ILLIDAN STOOD WITH KAEL'THAS and Vashj on the highest rooftop of the Black Temple, looking out over the bleak landscape of Shadowmoon Valley. The demon hunter had proclaimed his victory to the world of Outland from the battlements, but now he was restless. He did not feel as triumphant as he had expected. Instead he felt a sense of growing dread. In the distance the sky was red as blood. Crimson clouds raced toward the Black Temple. Powerful winds plucked at Illidan's wings. Rivers of reddish dust flowed through the air. Illidan's skin tingled, and he noticed motes of fel magic all around. Prince Kael'thas shouted, "What is this, Vashj? Where did this storm come from?" The naga matron replied, "Keep your head down, fool! Something terrible is drawing near!" The motes of magic grew brighter. A shimmering aura formed in the air near the roof, coalescing into a gigantic glowing figure. It hovered above them, large as a fortress tower. Something about its shape reminded Illidan of
the Broken, of the draenei. It was horned. Its skin burned, and flames flickered around its hooves, illuminating its whole body. It radiated power that dwarfed even that of the pit lord. Illidan knew he was once more in the presence of Kil'jaeden, the demon lord who commanded much of the Burning Legion. Kil'jaeden glared down at Illidan. "Foolish little mongrel. You failed to destroy the Frozen Throne as I commanded. And still you thought to hide from me in this forsaken backwater! I thought you to be more cunning, Illidan." It was impossible to do anything but meet Kil'jaeden's gaze. The Deceiver's eyes were magnetic. They compelled adoration and awe. They held an infinity of promises and an eternity of terrors. A link was established between them. The thrill of contact was electric. Illidan felt Kil'jaeden's cruel mind inspect his own. He caught flickers of his adversary's surface thoughts. He saw worlds laid to waste, empires become playthings, ultimate power answer to the will of this mighty being and his servants. It was all part of the Deceiver's technique of seduction. This, too, can be yours, those eyes promised, and they left no doubt about the truth of that pledge. Obey Kil'jaeden, and your enemies would be destroyed, your dreams of dominion fulfilled. Whatever you wished could be yours. Disobey Kil'jaeden, and ... A moment that Illidan had long dreaded and long planned for had finally arrived. He could not afford to let the Deceiver read his true thoughts. There were things he did not want Kil'jaeden to see, schemes the demon lord must not uncover until it was too late. He felt the enormous force of Kil'jaeden's will being brought to bear. The demon lord's power crashed down on him like a tidal wave. He braced himself against it, held it in check, then allowed the outer walls of his mind's defenses to collapse. Illidan reinforced the second layer of protection and slowly, carefully let it crumble as if it were beyond his strength to resist. As he did so he invoked the spells he had prepared for this moment. Subtly and near imperceptibly his secrets vanished, buried deep within the vaults of his mind. At the same time, he allowed Kil'jaeden's probe to smash through the final barrier and invade what appeared to be his innermost thoughts. He felt the colossal, intrusive presence of the demon lord. It riffled through his memories. It inspected the web of his recollections, searching,
searching, searching ... Illidan kept parts of his mind sealed, as any sorcerer would. Everyone had dark secrets and longings that they wanted no one to see. Kil'jaeden understood such things, as he understood the weaknesses of all living beings. Illidan had left him some tempting morsels while shielding entire levels of his mind behind wards of misdirection. The probe did not seek his hidden secrets. Instead it went directly to the memories of recent events. Images flickered through Illidan's mind, pulled to the surface by Kil'jaeden's curiosity. Illidan once again entered the corrupted forest of Felwood, keen to prove to his brother he was no tool of the demons. He heard the ring of warglaive against ancient enchanted blade as he battled the human traitor Prince Arthas, servant of the Lich King, the being who led the undead army known as the Scourge. They fought to a standstill. Arthas tempted him with knowledge of the location of the Skull of Gul'dan. Illidan knew he had to seek it out ... He felt once more the surge of ecstatic power as he broke the seals on the skull and transformed into a demon. He used the artifact's unleashed might to overcome the dreadlord Tichondrius-who had taken command of the Scourge-and his host, but even in the moment of victory, Illidan knew defeat, for his brother and Tyrande saw his transformation and turned from him. He understood again there was nothing left for him but exile. He sensed Kil'jaeden's malevolent amusement as Illidan relived his most recent meeting with the Deceiver. Kil'jaeden offered him a chance to rejoin the Legion if he would destroy the Frozen Throne and break the power of the rebellious Lich King. Malfurion thwarted Illidan's attempt, dooming him to flee Kil'jaeden's wrath. He felt Kil'jaeden pause as he assessed the sincerity of Illidan's effort. He relived his flight to Outland, only to be recaptured by Maiev. Luckily, aid came in the form of Kael'thas and Vashj. Even the triumph of this very day and his overthrow of Magtheridon were scrutinized. He knew this time that Kil'jaeden was with him, watching the pit lord's defeat. The Deceiver did not care who ruled Outland, so long as they ruled in the Legion's name. As suddenly as it had begun, the contact broke. The demon lord withdrew from Illidan's mind. He realized that what had felt like long hours passing had been the space between two heartbeats. Illidan's heart pounded against his ribs. He was instants from destruction.
At this moment, not even he could stand against the might of Kil'jaeden. If he was slain here, all his schemes and sacrifices would come to naught. He searched for the right words-they were the only weapons that could save him now. He put the appropriate note of pleading into his voice, knowing it would flatter the demon's vanity to think Illidan abased himself. "Kil'jaeden! I was merely set back. I am attempting to bolster my forces here. The Lich King will be destroyed, I promise you!" The demon's gaze turned from Illidan to Vashj and then settled on Prince Kael'thas. Illidan knew that all of their lives hung in the balance. There was a moment of silence that seemed to stretch into an eternity before the demon spoke again. "Indeed? Still, these servitors you've gathered show some promise. I will give you one last chance, Illidan. Destroy the Frozen Throne, or face my eternal wrath!" Fel energy surged. The blaze of light around Kil'jaeden intensified to the point of being unbearable, and when it faded, the demon lord was gone. Illidan exhaled a long breath. Had he done it? Had he concealed his true intentions from Kil'jaeden? Had he deceived the Deceiver? He supposed he would find out soon enough. His fists clenched in rage at the thought of the way Kil'jaeden had treated him. Like a puppet. He fought his anger down. The time was coming when he would make his enemies pay for what they had done, even Kil'jaeden. Illidan just needed to wear the mask of obedience for a bit longer. To buy himself some time, he had to do what the Deceiver asked. He glanced at his companions. They looked back at him with doubt in their eyes. Briefly he considered telling them of his plans, but he dismissed the idea. They, too, had been examined as he had been. They, too, had felt the demon lord's threats and blandishments. Who knew how they had responded in their secret hearts? Illidan said, "Perhaps hiding here was not the most prudent decision. Still, the quest lies before us. Will you follow me into the cold heart of death itself?" Lady Vashj coiled her serpent body beneath her and stretched her torso to its full height. "The naga are yours to command, Lord Illidan. Where you go, we follow." Prince Kael'thas looked dazed, as was only natural after having caught the full attention of a demon lord. He pulled himself together and said, "The
blood elves are yours as well, master. We will drive the Scourge before us and shatter the Frozen Throne as you command." "We have some time yet," Illidan said. "There are things that I must do before we go. We must be prepared."
CHAPTER TWO Four Years Before the Fall
MAIEV SHADOWSONG STUDIED THE PARCHED land, shielding her eyes from the blaze of the huge Outland sun with one gauntleted hand. Her gaze shifted from the dusty road to the hillside. She caught the scuttling movement of one of their alien pursuers as it ducked out of sight behind a boulder on the slope above them. "I see our insectoid friends are still following us," Anyndra said. Maiev glanced at her second-in-command. Like all night elves, Anyndra was tall and slender. The sweat-stained tabard of a Watcher clung to her. A red scarf held her green hair from her eyes. Anyndra would not have been Maiev's first choice as a lieutenant, but she had to work with what she had. The thirty troops strung out along the road behind her were the only survivors of the ambush that had ripped Illidan from her grasp mere weeks before. Lady Vashj and Prince Kael'thas would answer for the deaths they had caused freeing the Betrayer. "The ravagers will not give up," Maiev said. "They are hungry." "I have heard they take captives to feed to their hatchlings," Anyndra said. It did not surprise Maiev. Outland was a hideous place inhabited by monstrous creatures. Even her spell-woven armor could not entirely neutralize the heat. She wished she could wipe away the perspiration trickling down her brow, but her full-face helm prevented that. Instead she squinted at the ridge again. There were more of the scuttlers up there, a lot of them. Their movements reminded her of gigantic spiders. In the distance she heard the blaring foghorn roar of a fel reaver, one of the titanic war machines that thundered across these parched wastes with earth-shaking strides. Two days ago the Watchers had barely managed to
escape one. It had threatened to reduce them to a bloody pulp beneath its enormous demon-metal feet. Maiev's nightsaber let out a fierce roar as if responding to the challenge. The other riding cats echoed the sound. Upslope, a ravager scuttled into view to investigate the source of the noise. "I could put an arrow through that ravager's eye," said Anyndra, producing an arrow with her distinctive green-and-red fletching. She was proud of her skill with a bow and liked to display it every chance she got. Maiev gave her a tight-lipped smile. "Why bother? There are thousands more of the creatures." She nudged her nightsaber into its long, loping stride. "Let them follow us if they wish. If they attack, we will teach them the folly of their ways. Otherwise, do not waste precious arrows." The troops fell into line behind her, surveying their surroundings warily. Maiev knew she was going to have to keep a close watch on them. Back on Azeroth, she would never have doubted their commitment to the hunt, but here things were different. A few of her soldiers had had a wild look in their eyes ever since they had passed through the magical portal in pursuit of Illidan. She took in another breath of the dry air. She had been places on Azeroth that were just as parched, but something about Hellfire Peninsula made her feel thirstier than she had been even in the desert of Tanaris. At least there, she had known the ocean was near. So far they had found no evidence that this place had a sea. As far as she could tell, Outland floated in a great void. Water was scarce. "He will not escape us, Warden," said Anyndra. Maiev shook her head, clearing it of her musings. She refocused on her lieutenant and the task at hand. "Of course he will not. I have not crossed the gap between worlds to let the Betrayer elude justice." "He has powerful allies here." Anyndra's voice was soft and held a hint of doubt. The other members of the company had fallen silent. They were listening to hear what Maiev had to say. "No matter how powerful his allies are, he will not get away," Maiev said. She decided to address her troops' unspoken questions head-on. "We captured Illidan once. We will capture him again." Anyndra's face froze into a mask. She glanced toward the ridge as if seeking to hide from her leader any doubts she might feel. The scuttling
ravagers still kept pace with them. Maiev looked to the right. Scores of the insect-like beasts carpeted the other slope, flanking the road. If there were more ravagers ahead, Maiev and her people were riding into a trap. It would not be the first one they had fallen into here. "He was not with Kael'thas or Lady Vashj when we first captured him," Anyndra said. Clearly the way the two powerful sorcerers had rescued Illidan and slaughtered her fellow Watchers was on her mind. Maiev said, "Prince Kael'thas is a treacherous renegade. Lady Vashj is a twisted abomination. If they get in our way, we will kill them." Maiev was not entirely sure how she would make good on that threat. She pushed that thought aside as a distraction. The blood elf prince and the naga matron were not important. Illidan was. She had not spent ten thousand years of her life making sure his evil was contained just so he could take the opportunity to work his wickedness now. "You think this Broken sage will be able to help us against them? This Akama?" Anyndra asked. "I do not know, Anyndra," she said. "He may be of use to us. He may not. In the long run, it does not matter. We will triumph. We always have. We always will." Anyndra looked away. Maiev let the silence hold and gave her attention to their surroundings once more. The landscape of Outland had been torn apart by magic. It was a terrible warning of what dealing with those forces could unleash. She had seen its like before.
* * *
ALTHOUGH IT HAD HAPPENED more than ten thousand years ago, Maiev remembered it as if it were yesterday. No, as if it had happened only hours ago ... the day when she had first seen the Burning Legion. Her memories of that terrible time were as fresh as they had been when newly minted. No one had understood what they faced back then, not really. They had thought the Legion was merely a temporary threat spawned by uncontrolled magic. They had thought Illidan was merely a misguided sorcerer. At least the others had. She had always known different. The ozone scent in the Outland air brought back the memory of her first encounter with an infernal. She recalled the stench of the near-mindless thing
as vividly as the night blossoms blooming amid the pavilions of Darnassus. It had seemed too big and too filled with magic to be opposed. The leaves shriveled as it passed, turned autumn-sere by the backwash of its blazing body. She called on the power of Elune, and the moon goddess destroyed the demon, shattering it into scorching fragments, leaving Maiev free to heal the seared flesh of its victims. That had been only one of a thousand skirmishes. She had witnessed horrors during the War of the Ancients. Forests had burned and nations had died. It had taught her that there could be no compromise with those who sought power through the use of perverted magic. They needed to be stamped out, crushed, slain before they could unleash destruction upon the innocent, before they could corrupt all that was natural and good. Maiev had seen that from the very beginning. It was a pity that others had not shared her clarity of vision. If only they had heeded her back then, there would be no need for this hunt now. If they had slain Illidan when his wickedness had first been revealed, countless innocent lives would have been saved. Instead they had followed the counsel of Illidan's twin, Malfurion, and Tyrande Whisperwind. Time and again the pair had spared his life, even after his wickedness was plain for all to see. At the end of the War of the Ancients, when Maiev was set to end the Betrayer's life, had they not granted him mercy and argued for his imprisonment rather than his death? Since then, Tyrande had gone even further, slaying the Watchers guarding Illidan's prison. She claimed she had freed him in order to gain his aid in the fight against the Burning Legion. At first it seemed that she had been right. Illidan had aided them, but then his true nature had revealed itself. He had absorbed the power of the Skull of Gul'dan and transformed himself into a demon, his body mutated to mirror the inner monstrousness of his soul. Even then, his brother had only banished him from the forests rather than striking him dead. Maiev snorted. Illidan was but a tool of the Burning Legion. He always had been and always would be. Because of those fools, Maiev had spent ten thousand years guarding the wretched sorcerer. And for what? Maiev ground her teeth in fury. Tyrande should have spent the long centuries imprisoned beside Illidan. She had proved that when, with a folly
exceeded only by her arrogance, she had freed him. She had made a mockery of all the oaths that Maiev had sworn. She had turned ten thousand years of vigilance into a cruel joke. Even if she was now the ruler of the night elves, she had no right to do that. A sound from the right drew Maiev's attention. The ravagers were edging closer. They held their bodies low as they moved along on all fours, taking advantage of the undulations of the land to keep out of the line of fire from ranged weapons and magic. Perhaps they were more intelligent than Maiev had thought. Given their numbers, it would not really matter. If they got close enough, they would pull down what remained of her force. She did not have enough troops left to be able to afford the loss of one. She raised her hand and gave the signal to ride at double time. With impeccable discipline, the Watchers' pace increased. Their great cat mounts stretched their long limbs and raced forward. Anyndra rode up alongside Maiev, a questioning look on her face. She was wondering if Maiev would give the order to turn and fight. Now was not the time to senselessly throw away lives, not when the trail of the Betrayer lay before them and they had the scent of their prey in their nostrils. Maiev thought about Illidan-he was no longer an elf. She shuddered when she recalled what he had become. Horned and hoofed and batwinged, as much a demon as the eredar he had worshipped and then betrayed. If he really had betrayed them ... That was the eternal problem with trying to comprehend the mind of Illidan. No sane individual could. Who knew what that maniac truly thought? His mind was so twisted by the dark forces of the magic he lusted after that his reasoning was impossible to follow. And that was a problem, for a hunter needed to understand her prey. It was the one sure way of trapping it. It troubled Maiev sometimes. She had heard the whispers. She knew what was said behind her back. There were those who claimed that she had become as warped as the foe she had spent so long guarding. She laughed at the bitter humor of it. Weaklings! All of them. They were not prepared to deal with the evil that had taken root so deeply among them. They feared those who had the strength to do what needed to be done. They made compromises with the demons that would destroy them, and fooled themselves into believing it was
wisdom. Well, she knew better. She would never compromise. She would not rest until Illidan was dead or once again bound within his prison. She knew her duty. She would keep her oaths. She did not care what others thought of her. She would not be distracted from her quest. "Warden Shadowsong!" Anyndra's voice broke into her reverie. "What is it?" Her second-in-command flinched at the coldness in Maiev's tone. "There!" Maiev's gaze followed Anyndra's pointing finger. A host of ravagers lined the hillsides above them. The Watchers rode over the rise and looked down the long valley through which the road wound. Ahead of them, more of the four-legged monsters blocked their path. Maiev had not noticed the trap quickly enough, lost in her musings on Illidan. She cursed the Betrayer once again. "Prepare for battle!" Maiev shouted.
* * *
MAIEV AND HER WATCHERS drew themselves up in line abreast. The warden studied her people, noting whose glances darted around in panic and who stared at the enemy with cold, killing calm. It made her proud that far more eyes held the latter emotion. The night elves were surrounded and outnumbered. Even facing hundreds of the alien monsters, they were not afraid. Some of them produced their bows and glaives. Responding to the mood of their riders, the nightsabers roared defiance. The druid Sarius dismounted and transformed into a monstrous bear, his fur branded with mystical markings. Maiev considered her options. To stand and fight was to be overwhelmed by the sheer number of the ravagers. Something had clearly stirred up the creatures. She glanced behind her, at the way she had come. The long, dusty road lay empty. They could retreat with little resistance, but that would set them back to where they had started. She needed to thrust ahead, down into the land the natives called Zangarmarsh, if she was to make contact with Akama. She had to admit she was curious. The Broken's message hinted that he knew something of Illidan's plans, and all she had managed to find out about
Akama from the draenei at the Temple of Telhamat was that he was a leader in a faction known as the Ashtongue tribe. He had access to troops, and he knew this land. He was the only one who had seen fit to contact her. How had his agents known where to find her? Why did he choose to reach out to her? Was it a trap? Ahead of her the sky darkened, as if low hills or perhaps huge trees glowered on the horizon. The air carried a strange tang. The wind bore hints of rot and putrefaction and something else she could not quite place. There was just the faintest trace of moisture on the breeze blowing toward them. Zangarmarsh was a monstrous place, a boggy fenland filled with alien horrors. Maiev took a deep breath and stared down at her foes. There were many of the beasts, but they lacked discipline. There were weak points in their massed ranks. If she concentrated all her forces, they could puncture the enemy line and ride like the wind down the road. She doubted the scuttling monsters would follow into the swamplands. These dry hills appeared to be their home. "Form up in a flying wedge behind me. We will cut down these animals and smash our way clear." The Watchers nodded their understanding. Anyndra raised her horn and sounded one long, silvery note. The night elves charged downslope. A smile twisted Maiev's lips as she drew her umbra crescent. Just for a moment, she could lose herself in the fury of combat and let her mind rest. Her nightsaber roared. The elves crashed into the ravagers in an avalanche of fur, claw, muscle, and blade. She slashed the nearest scuttler with her weapon, wishing it were Illidan. What is the Betrayer up to now? she wondered.
CHAPTER THREE Four Years Before the Fall
MAIEV RODE TOWARD THE BROKEN VILLAGE OF Orebor Harborage. She licked her lips. Her tongue tingled where it had touched the spores. They were everywhere. In her hair, in her clothes. They settled behind the ears and in the sweat-soaked sleeves of shirts. A phosphorescent fungus grew on the skin of her followers, and only careful cleaning and the use of healing magic could take it off. She had thought Hellfire Peninsula was a terrible place, but this was worse. The entranceway to Outland was a desert hell filled with fel orcs and hideous creatures, but Zangarmarsh was something darker and stranger. It was hot and humid and dank. Huge mushroom trees, larger than the towering oaks of Ashenvale, blocked out the sun. Manta-like flyers flitted through their shadows, and things part jellyfish, part alien monster floated through the air. True, there were fewer orcs, but there were other menaces. After smashing through the host of ravagers, the Watchers had been attacked by a giant ambulatory fungus. They had been ambushed by ogres and swarmed by huge stinging insects. She had lost Kolea to tiny grubs that had emerged from her flesh after she had been stung, the vermin eating her eyes and her brain. Another death that ultimately could be laid at the feet of Illidan. Maiev longed to look upon the beauty of Darnassus once more. She would have given ten centuries of her life just to breathe its clean air and walk through its airy plazas, to listen to its bards and singers. She suppressed the feeling, despising her own weakness. There was no sense in longing for what she could not have. Orebor Harborage looked like the ruins of what once might have passed for civilization in these parts. Now there were only tumbledown huts built on what had been the marble base of some formerly great plaza. Stagnant,
stinking water surrounded the huge plinth. Jagged ridges of towering mountains loomed over it. All around, Broken hobbled. They stared at the night elves as if they had never seen their like before. One or two of them reached out with empty palms, begging for alms, but most averted their eyes with tired, defeated gazes. Maiev felt that they would not raise their hands even to protect themselves. They were not the stuff of which suitable allies were made. Not all of them were like that. Some carried weapons and watched her warily. She rode up to one now, looked at him, and said, "Akama! Where is he?" The Broken studied her and then her followers. At first, she thought he was not going to answer, but then he jerked a thumb in the direction of the town center. From some of the huts came the sound of weeping. Her nostrils dilated as she caught the scent of rotting flesh. Wounds turned bad very easily here. Sometimes the spores got into the cuts and clung to ruined flesh like mold to old bread. An ancient Broken crone hobbled past, her hooves splashing through deep puddles in the shattered stonework. She kept her eyes down and paid no attention to the strangers or her surroundings. She seemed too wrapped in her own misery to look beyond it. "What do these people live on?" Anyndra sounded upset. The sight of the Broken had clearly triggered some instinct for compassion within her. "Mold and whatever insects they can catch, I have no doubt," Maiev said. It was what her people had been living on for days. The flora and fauna might be alien, but they were edible. At least they had not been poisoned so far. It was always possible that their foodstuffs contained slow toxins whose effects they had not felt yet, but Maiev's spells had found no taint in them. "There are fish in those lakes we saw on the way here, and other things." "Yes," said Anyndra, no doubt remembering the massive reptilian hydras that had attacked them. "I suppose so. You really think this Akama will be able to help us?" She gestured at their surroundings. "It does not look as if he can even help his own people." Maiev agreed, but she did not want to say so aloud. Her people did not need another blow to their morale. Ahead, another Broken sentry loomed. "Akama," she said. The soldier gestured toward a small hut on the edge of the plaza. A group of guards robed in ash gray stood there, gazing in her
direction. They did not look hostile, but they did not look friendly, either. Maiev rode closer and said, "I seek Akama." For a moment, the Broken gave no sign of having heard her; then, as if at a silent signal, they stood aside and left the way into the hut's interior clear. The warden dismounted, and Anyndra and the others stalked behind her. As they approached, the guards lowered their pikes, blocking the way. "Just you," said the one who had the insignia of some sort of officer. "If you are the one called Maiev Shadowsong." Tension crackled in the air. Her Watchers did not want to leave her. She might be stepping into a trap. On the other hand, if these were potential allies, she did not want to make trouble. She was capable of looking after herself, as anyone who tried to take her would find out. "Wait here," she told the Watchers. Sarius looked directly at her, and she nodded. The druid detached himself from the group and moved into the shadow of a rubble pile. He did not reemerge in his own form, but a large bird hopped on top and looked around with bright beady eyes. The guards stood impassive. Maiev stepped into the hut and was immediately aware of the whimpering of a small Broken child. In the center of the chamber, beside a fire, a gnarled, oddly altered Broken leaned forward and touched the child's brow. He muttered something, and Maiev sensed the flow of energy-not the corrupt taint of fel magic, not the twisted flows of the arcane, but something else. She did not relax her guard. There were many ways of hiding the evil in magic. The child quieted and the Broken whispered something in her ear. More power flowed. The whimpering ceased, replaced by the sound of regular breathing and tiny, inelegant snores. The Broken rose and turned toward Maier. His voice wheezed with more than age. He seemed to have to force his words out, as if the very act of speaking was painful to him. "I thought I might be able to do some small good while I waited for you." He paused as if he needed a rest. His breathing was labored. "Rosaria had lung rot fever, but I think I have burned it from her. If she is kept warm and dry, she should make a full recovery." "You are Akama," Maiev said. "I am Akama, leader of the Ashtongue." "Your message said you wanted to talk with me," she said. "You are Maiev Shadowsong?"
"I am curious as to how you came to know my name." "He has mentioned it." "He?" "The one you call the Betrayer." Maiev reached for her crescent blade. Akama made no response. He held his hands wide, showing he had no weapon. Not that it made much difference. He had already shown he knew how to wield magic. "What do you know of the Betrayer?" Maiev asked. "Alas, far too much, to my cost. Walk with me. We have much to talk about, you and I." He gestured toward the rear entrance of the hut. Perhaps this was just a ruse to separate her from her troops. If so, Sarius would be watching in his shapeshifted form. And she was not without the means to defend herself. "After you," she said, making a gracious gesture toward the door. Akama nodded and hobbled forward, putting his back to her, as if he wanted to show that he did not fear treachery from her. They emerged behind the building. Toppled houses surrounded them. Garbage lay strewn around the half-ruined structure. Mold clung to it, as it clung to everything here. Glittering insects buzzed around it, feasting hungrily. Maiev wrinkled her nose. Akama said, "It was not always like this. Once, Orebor Harborage was a beautiful place." "I will need to take your word for that." "You should. The world has changed since Ner'zhul wrought his destruction. Once, this was a center of civilization, a place of learning, a hub of trade." "That is hard to believe." "You should have seen this place when tens of thousands of my people walked here, admiring the statues, looking upon the gracious homes." "I did not come here to purchase a dwelling. I came here seeking an ally." Akama looked up at her. "You are not the first of your kind to tell me that." "Illidan is not of my kind. He forfeited any claim to be a night elf long ago, when he first made his pact with the Burning Legion." "And yet once he was a great hero of your people, to hear him tell it." "To hear him tell it. I could tell you differently."
They passed the boundary posts of the village and arrived at the edge of a vast, calm-looking lake. Small islands dotted the water. Massive buzzing insects flitted over the surface. Akama came to a halt beside a small, motionless pool. The water was clearer here. Still, a faint freckling of spores floated on the surface. Shadowy shapes moved in the depths. "And I would most probably believe you," Akama said. He gestured toward a chipped stone bench that overlooked the lake. "Please be seated." Maiev remained standing. Pointedly she placed her hand on the hilt of her weapon. Akama's grimace might have been intended to be a smile, but it showed his menacing fangs. "No one intends you harm here, but as you wish. Let us talk about the Betrayer." Maiev had been waiting for this opening. "He is a being of great and cosmic evil. Long ago, more than ten thousand years as we measure time on Azeroth, he betrayed us to the Burning Legion. For ten thousand years, I stood watch over him to make him pay for his crimes. In the end, through the murderous treachery of one who should have known better, he escaped my vigilance and fled my wrath to this place. He is a terrible sorcerer, steeped in wickedness you cannot-" Akama raised one hand, palm outward. "I know all this. I have talked with him, fought alongside him ..." Maiev glanced around, half expecting at any moment to see naga emerge from the water or blood elves erupt from the undergrowth. There was nothing. Akama tilted his head to one side and watched her as if her behavior was curious. If she had not known better, she would have thought he was amused. "Why do you serve the Betrayer?" Maiev asked. She could not keep the anger out of her voice. The sight of her wrath had made demons tremble, but Akama merely shrugged. "Because he offered to help my people free the Temple of Karabor. He was the enemy of my enemy." Maiev glared into his alien eyes. Akama looked down at his interlocked fingers and let out a long sigh. "And that is no longer the case?" Maiev said. "He has made no move to return the temple to my people, and we took it more than a month ago. I have my doubts as to whether he ever will. I fear
we have removed our former conqueror, Magtheridon, only to put something worse in the pit lord's place. Illidan has made a new pact with the demon lord Kil'jaeden. He has agreed to destroy the Frozen Throne for him. It seems the Burning Legion still holds our sacred site. It just has a new leader." "And you feel I may be the enemy of your enemy." Akama nodded. "You imprisoned him. He hates you and, unless I miss my guess, he fears you. You have great power. I can sense that myself." Maiev's smile flickered, thin and cold as a waning crescent moon. "He is right to fear me. I will see him bound once more, or dead." "I thought such might prove to be the case." The Broken turned his head and studied the waters as if he expected them to reveal some great truth. His voice was flat and emotionless. "And would such a turn of events be acceptable to you, too?" Maiev asked. She already knew the answer. This Broken might pose as a holy sage, but he was treacherous. The fact that he had served the Betrayer and yet was here now proved that. She could find a use for him. To use his words, he was the enemy of her enemy. "If there is no other way of regaining the sacred ground ..." Akama took a wheezing breath, unclasped his hands, and looked back at her. "I spent my youth in the temple. It was ... It is a holy place. I would not see it desecrated again." Maiev considered this. Akama seemed to be talking as much to himself as to her. There was pain in his voice, and a real sense of loss. "So what do you plan on doing?" "At the moment, there is nothing we can do." "What?" Maiev could not keep the shock from her voice. Her knuckles went white on the hilt of her blade. She had come here expecting either an ambush or a potential ally. Her soul cried out for action. How could this pitiful ancient sit there with Illidan loose? "Illidan is too strong. He is backed by Prince Kael'thas and Lady Vashj. I believe you have already met them. To your cost." "I do not fear them." "Perhaps you should." "It is not for you to tell me whom I should or should not fear." Akama made a small, apologetic gesture with his left hand. "I can see that."
"Did you come here to beg for my aid and then cringe in these ruins?" Perhaps he was unimpressed by the size of her force. Perhaps he did not believe she was capable of capturing Illidan. Perhaps he had judged her and found her wanting. "You ask for my aid and yet you offer me nothing." "You elves-how can you live so long and learn so little of patience? There is a time for everything, and a place. The best revenge is not hurried." "I do not seek revenge. I seek justice." "Yes, I can see you believe that." This time she was certain there was mockery in his voice. Akama turned to look into the distance once more. Something large broke the surface and splashed back down into the water again. One of the big insects vanished with it. "They can wait for days, those snappers. Immobile. Torpid. You would never think them a threat. But let prey come within reach, and they strike. Their jaws can take an arm off." "You plan on imitating some fish?" "It is an eel." "I did not come here for a lesson in piscine taxonomy." "But you came here for something." "How can I help you when you will not help me?" "When the time is right, I will give you all the help you need. But I will not have my people needlessly slaughtered because of your recklessness." Maiev unclenched her fingers from her weapon. She put her hands by her sides and then flexed them. She took a deep breath and sought inner stillness. Slowly her fury diminished. "Very well. At least tell me what he is doing now." "He is taking Magtheridon to Hellfire Citadel." "Why?" Akama shrugged. "He does not tell me everything." "Perhaps because he does not trust you." "Perhaps he has reason." The Broken fumbled within a pouch hanging from his waist. He produced a small, rough-looking stone inscribed with strange runes. He held it out to Maiev in the flat of his palm. She looked at it but made no attempt to take it. She could sense magic in it. It did not have the foulness of fel sorcery or the wickedness of arcane magic. As far as she could tell. "Through this I will contact you when I have something worth telling. I carry its twin." The stone still lay on his outstretched palm. "Of course, if you
are afraid to take it, we can find another way ..." Maiev snatched the stone from his hand. The presence of magic tingled against her gauntlet. Nothing terrible happened. "As you wish." Akama made a small bow. "I can see why he fears you. You are very much alike." Akama walked away, leaving Maiev to stare at her reflection in the dark mirror of the lake. Her image glared back at her, a picture of frustrated fury. She stooped, picked up a pebble, and lobbed it into the water, smashing her likeness into ripples.
CHAPTER FOUR Four Years Before the Fall
SLOWLY MAIEV AND HER WATCHERS CREPT OVER THE warm rocks. The blazing sun of Hellfire Peninsula sent long shadows sweeping away from the large boulders. It had been a lengthy ride back from Zangarmarsh, made at great speed, but it would be worth all the saddle sores if she caught Illidan unawares. She did not need Akama. All she needed was the opportunity to strike at the Betrayer when he least expected it. Anyndra gestured with her right hand and raised three fingers. Maiev crept forward on her belly until she reached the lieutenant's position; then she raised her head over the ridgeline and saw that her second-in-command was correct. Three fel orcs stood there, huge, muscular creatures, with red skin and glowing eyes. Their heavy bodies hunched in the crouched posture all orcs shared. Their stance spoke of fury, every muscle tensed. Each movement was quick, hard, and sullen, as if the fel orcs were looking for an excuse to strike someone. Maiev would give them their wish. She meant to be in position overlooking the road to Hellfire Citadel when Illidan rode past. She invoked her powers and blinked across the intervening space. Air displaced with a near-silent puff as she reappeared behind the largest of the fel orcs. One stroke took his head. She sprang forward and drove her umbra crescent through the second fel orc's breast, then rolled onward. The third fel orc struggled to bring his axe to bear. Her foot caught him behind the knee and tumbled him to the ground. Her blade found his jugular. Scarcely three heartbeats had passed. Anyndra had just brought her arrow to her ear. Maiev gestured for the remainder of her troops to cross the ground to her new position, and then she dragged the corpses into the shadow of a boulder out of sight of any wind riders passing overhead.
The smell of big cat in her nostrils told her that Sarius had joined her in concealment. The druid wore the form of a huge panther, oddly marked. He moved across the parched landscape in utter silence, following the curves of the brown earth, out of sight of all but the most vigilant. He growled a greeting and stalked toward the ridge's edge. Just as quietly, she followed him to the brow of the cliff and gazed out on Hellfire Citadel. It had the brutal appearance of all orc fortifications, in this case magnified by the sheer size of the place. The citadel looked as if it had been built to accommodate an army of giants. It loomed over the surrounding lands, each tower the finger of a gigantic hand that reached out to seize the sky. It was rough-hewn but immense, built of red rock and the bones of creatures that must have been as large as mountains. Magic saturated the stones. Even from this distance, she felt its evil. But it was not the keep that held her attention. It was the procession making its way along the road that led to the citadel. Tens of thousands of fel orcs marched in tightly packed formation, streaming across the landscape in a column leagues long. Among them marched companies of demons, bearing the banner of Illidan. In the vanguard rode a mass of blood elves, their steeds birdlike. Prince Kael'thas was at their head. His eyes were fixed upon the enormous chariot drawn by a team of twenty clefthoof. The gigantic creatures were muzzled and blinded to prevent them from panicking. Looking at the cage mounted on the giant chariot, Maiev understood why. It contained the pit lord Magtheridon. He stood many times the height of an elf and rattled the felsteel bars with arms the size of tree trunks. Even from the clifftop, Maiev felt his power. It smashed into her senses like the stench of ten thousand burning bodies. Chains that could have anchored the biggest warships bound him to the chariot. Maiev could see they were wound by spells strong enough to halt the slow drift of continents. Atop the chariot, wings spread, hands on his hips, his stance proclaiming his triumph and his lack of fear, stood Illidan. Such was the difference in size that he should have looked like a squirrel defying a helboar, but he did not. The aura of fel magical power blazing around him made him appear to be more than the equal of the pit lord. She was not alone in watching. Along the ridges, clans of fel orcs had gathered, as well as other observers. All of them were there to witness the
former lord of Outland being brought to Hellfire Citadel in chains. Hatred blazed bright within her. Enjoy your moment of triumph, Betrayer, Maiev thought. It will be your last. Anyndra dropped into place beside her. The lieutenant's eyes widened at the sight of the triumphal procession, and her fingers went lax around her bowstring. Sarius growled so softly it might almost have been a whimper. Overhead, fleshrippers circled, mangy wings spread wide, crucified on the hot thermals. Maiev considered her options. The fel orcs surely did not anticipate an attack. Soon the sun would go down. Illidan had obviously timed his arrival at the gates of Hellfire Citadel for before sundown, but he had been too slow to get there. It was typical of his overconfidence and his sloppiness. She could order her force to fan out near the cage. They could cover her as she rushed the Betrayer. One swift stroke and she could take his head. He would be too filled with bloated pride to notice her approach until her umbra crescent had swept out. Briefly she reveled in the image of holding his head high and tossing it into the assembled host of fel orcs. Her own death would be swift and certain after that, but it would be worth it to put an end to Illidan's cursed existence. She could die satisfied, knowing that she had sent her ancient enemy to oblivion before her. Her lips curled into a smile. She could almost feel Illidan's silky hair beneath her fingers as she raised his head aloft, almost feel the drip-drip-drip of blood from his severed neck. It was not impossible. She could use her ability to blink through the intervening space and be upon him before that undisciplined mass had time to react. Her spells of distraction and concealment would cloak her approach. There was no one down there who could match her ability at this. Not Kael'thas, not Vashj. Not Illidan himself. She became aware of Anyndra's hand on her arm and shrugged it off. "What?" "Warden Shadowsong, I asked you what the Betrayer could possibly want with a captured pit lord. I thought they called him a demon hunter. Why would he want one alive?" Slowly, Maiev let her hatred's fire damp down to a duller blaze. She stepped back from the edge of the precipice she found herself on. She had
been on the verge of ordering an attack. The idea of dying in a final blaze of glory, slaying her foe, had almost lured her into an error. What if something had gone wrong? What if the Betrayer had managed to escape, leaving her to face his legions with only this small force? Nothing would go wrong. She looked down at her hand. It was completely steady. There was not the slightest glimmer of a shake there. She focused on her lieutenant's question. It was a good one. What did Illidan plan to do with a captured pit lord? A being of Magtheridon's power could not be bound to service like some lesser demon. Not even Illidan could be insane enough to believe himself that strong. "What could he want with such a creature?" Anyndra repeated, as if she thought Maiev had not heard. She seemed determined to get an answer. Or perhaps she intended to distract Maiev from her target. Maiev muttered, "A sacrifice, a warning-who knows what goes through the mind of that maniac?" "But why would he want to sacrifice Magtheridon? What could he possibly gain from it?" Maiev shook her head and scowled. "How should I know?" Her second-in-command met her gaze levelly. "You always told me a hunter must understand her prey." Sarius growled on the other side of her. It seemed he, too, was curious. Maiev took another step back from the brink. Her heart was racing. Her breathing was shallow. She risked another glance at Illidan. He stood there so confident that he was invincible. She wanted to wipe that smirk from his face, grind those proud features into the dirt. Sarius scratched at her right arm with a claw. She realized what the druid was trying to tell her. Illidan's head had turned to look in their direction. All of his troops' gazes followed. There was no way they could see her from this distance. No way he could see her. She rolled away from the scarp edge. Anyndra and Sarius were behind her. Her mouth felt dry. She tensed, expecting to hear the furious roar of legions of fel orcs dispatched in pursuit. Maiev lay on her back for a moment, looking at the sky. No roar sounded. No alarm was given. Perhaps Illidan had seen them and did not think them enough of a threat to be bothered with. The idea was galling. She rolled downslope and sprang to her feet, out of the line of sight of the
enemy. The rest of her grim-faced troops crept back from the ridgeline, slowly filtering toward her position. It was bad discipline and bad tactics. Some of them should be keeping watch lest an assailant fall upon them the way she had fallen upon the fel orcs. She wanted to say something, then noticed all eyes were upon her. Anyndra flexed the fingers of her blade hand, the way she always did when trying to conceal the extremity of her nervousness. Sarius had reverted to his night elf form. His hawklike features were calm, but his mouth was a tight slash at the bottom of his face, and his eyes were narrowed as they focused on her. A frown scarred his otherwise smooth brow. Maiev studied the rest of her troops. A few were pale, and she guessed the sweat on their brows was not just from the heat. Others glanced around like mice expecting an owl to drop out of a moonlit sky. They were frightened. It was near unbelievable. They were Watchers, chosen for their courage and their steadiness in the face of danger. They had followed her through countless perils without flinching. Now they seemed ready to break and run. The night elves formed up in a half circle, looking up at her. One of them said, "We cannot win here." Maiev wrestled with her anger. She wanted to shout at them, to upbraid them for their folly and cowardice, but she could not. Enemies might hear her voice. A disturbance could call the attention of that mighty army thundering along the road below them. Slowly, she allowed the idea to seep into her mind that they might be right. She closed her eyes and offered up a prayer to Elune. When she opened them again, she realized that she was not looking at a force of Watchers. The proud, disciplined troops who had ridden out of the vaults of the Barrow Deeps were gone. In their place was a small group of dusty elves, strangers in a savage land, lost, far from home, and confronted by a foe with limitless fighters at his disposal. Illidan had already overcome the mightiest demon in Outland and turned his legions into loyal followers. Perhaps her people were right to doubt that they could overcome him. They stared at her, waiting to hear what she had to say. Even now, they retained the habit of looking to her for leadership. She could not let them down. She took a deep breath and said, "No. We cannot win here."
Some looked pleased at her admission. A few looked astonished, as if they could not quite believe the words had come from her mouth. Maiev understood how they felt, but she kept speaking, her voice emerging in a rusty rasp. "We cannot win here. Now. That does not mean the Betrayer is safe from us forever." Several of them nodded as if she was saying what they had expected her to say, as if she was giving voice to their consciences. "He cannot escape us. He cannot simply walk away from his transgressions. We are the avenging hand of the kaldorei. We will be his undoing. We had him in our grasp once and he escaped, aided by his treacherous allies. But the Betrayer will not escape us again. Right is on our side. Justice is on our side. The spirits of our dead cry out for vengeance. They insist that we make him pay for his crimes. "We have come too far, sacrificed too much, to waste our chance. If we are to return to Darnassus with our heads held high, we must go back with the Betrayer or his corpse. If we do not, our people will think of us only as those who betrayed their trust. You have seen what is happening here. You know that the Betrayer is amassing an army. We must make sure that all of Azeroth knows, too, and understands that we did our duty." One elf swallowed and wiped her eyes. They looked watery with unshed tears. Maiev shifted her hands slowly, her movements as controlled as a dancer's. Her fists clenched. "There is a time for everything, and Illidan's time is coming. You followed me here knowing that, and I swear to you that your faith was justified. I will not allow Illidan to escape the consequences of his deeds." She paused to give her words emphasis. "I will do so even if I must go on alone." She let her words sink in. "All of you swore an oath to follow me. Each of you knows the value of your word. The question you must ask yourself is whether you will remain true to your oaths, or whether you will be like him. Are you as faithless as the Betrayer, or are you true daughters and sons of Elune? In your heart of hearts, only you can answer that. I want you each to look within yourself and find the answer to that question. I want no one with me who will flinch when the moment of truth comes. Only you can decide whether you wish to stand beside me when I bring due punishment down upon the head of Illidan the Betrayer." Some of the elves would not meet her eyes. A few looked away, but most
of them, she was proud to see, stared up at her with renewed determination written on their faces. Their belief fed her own, and she felt her usual certainty return. "I am with you," said Anyndra. She knelt and offered her blade. "And I," said Sarius. He did the same. One by one, the rest of the Watchers pledged renewed loyalty, even those few who were visibly reluctant. They bowed because their friends and comrades were doing so and because they did not wish to be left alone in this alien place. Maiev nodded in satisfaction. She had won one small victory this day, at least. "What now, Warden Shadowsong?" Anyndra asked. Maiev responded, "We must find allies. This is a land where they are essential. We must seek out someone braver than Akama and see if they will aid us."
CHAPTER FIVE Four Years Before the Fall
ILLIDAN STRODE INTO THE VAST CHAMBER IN which Magtheridon was bound. The demon hunter seethed with frustration. His defeat at the hands of Arthas stung his pride. Reports of Maiev's presence had filtered in from across Outland, but so far she had proved elusive as a ghost. She still sought to bury him in chains. The spells restraining the pit lord reminded Illidan of his own imprisonment, and of those who had held him. Rage bubbled up within him. He paced eight steps and forced himself to stop before he could take the ninth. "So you failed in the mission that great Kil'jaeden gave you, little Illidan," boomed Magtheridon. His words echoed off the massive stone blocks of the walls, amplified by the huge well in the center of the chamber. "Your failure to destroy the Lich King does not surprise me. You are destined always to fail." Illidan stared at the pit lord. Even shackled deep in the great vaults below Hellfire Citadel, Magtheridon remained a potent figure. The magical chains holding him were taut. The binding spells from the Manticron cubes constantly deformed as the demon exerted his will. Illidan muttered a word of power. Magical generators blazed, and fel energy surged. Magtheridon screamed. The smell of scorched demon flesh filled the air. "How does it feel to be defeated utterly by such a failure?" Illidan asked. The enormous tail of the pit lord lashed, causing him more pain as he made contact with binding spells. "You think you have defeated me?" Magtheridon's voice rasped out. His breathing sounded like muted thunder even within this vast hall.
"Apparently you are too stupid to realize when you have been vanquished. It seems you think being imprisoned is a sign of victory." Illidan sent another surge of energy through the chains. Magtheridon's agonized bellow almost deafened him. The pit lord collapsed like a bull hit with a butcher's cleaver. He lay there gasping for a moment, then pulled himself up onto his knees. "I am not the only one who has been defeated," Magtheridon said. There was a sardonic note in his voice. "I wonder what Lord Kil'jaeden will say when he learns of your latest failure. I believe this was your last chance." "How do you know I have failed?" Illidan was curious. In the weeks since he had returned from Azeroth, he had been recovering from his wounds and gathering his strength for this moment. Had some of the jailors made the mistake of speaking to the pit lord? If so, he would make sure they never made another such error again. "Come now, little Illidan. One need not be as clever as you to understand such things. I see that unpleasant scratch on your side. It does not take any great intelligence to work out what happened since you have been away. You have the stink of the walking dead on you, and the taint of that great blade, Frostmourne. You encountered Arthas, did you not? And you were defeated." It was the truth. Illidan had gone to Azeroth, fought against the renegade death knight, and lost. With that defeat, Illidan's last chance of destroying the Lich King and appeasing the wrath of Kil'jaeden had vanished. Ultimately it did not matter. The break would have had to come sooner or later. "Yes, yes, little Illidan. I smell spiderwebs and walking dead and the subtle tang of strange plagues. And I know you are still closing the gates the Legion has opened to Outland. Even through your binding spells, I can sense such sorceries. You will not escape great Kil'jaeden's wrath that way, nor will you spare Azeroth. His invasion of your precious homeworld may be delayed by a year or two, but it cannot be stopped." Casually this time, Illidan lanced the pit lord with another surge of pain. Magtheridon managed to remain upright. Defiance twisted his lips. Illidan was careful not to kill him, for Magtheridon must still serve his purpose. He studied the shimmering aura of the demon. He was almost weak enough now. Almost. Illidan needed some more of Magtheridon's power to be bled away, some more of his will weakened. "Does it gall you that you will not be there, pit lord?"
Magtheridon laughed. "Yes, little Illidan, it does. I would enjoy the destruction of your pathetic world. I would enjoy burning your precious forests. The screams of a million sacrifices would give me great pleasure. I will miss the conquest of your world, but there will be others. A few more are left before the Legion's final triumph. It is a pity you have forsaken all possibility of participating in such delights. There is something in you that enjoys these things, too. We both know it. Great Kil'jaeden will not be gentle when he takes his vengeance on you. He is not known for his mercy. And to you he will show none. You have changed sides for the last time, Betrayer." Illidan sent yet another surge of fel power through the bindings. Magtheridon screamed as agony tore at him. Illidan let the energy flow till the demon's howls threatened to shatter the stone dome above him. He kept it going until he judged the moment was right. The pit lord was weak enough now. It was time. "Akama, come forth," Illidan said. The door of the chamber opened and Akama entered, shoulders hunched, head down. Long tentacles dribbled from the cowl of his robe. He shuffled over to the dais upon which Illidan stood. Akama's eyes never left the bound pit lord. He clearly was afraid of Magtheridon. Just as clearly, he hated him for the desecration he had worked on the Temple of Karabor. There was malice in his gaze as well as fear. Magtheridon gasped, "Tell me, Broken one, has the Betrayer returned your precious temple to you yet?" "What do you wish of me, master?" Akama tilted his head so that he was facing Illidan, but it was clear he meant to keep the pit lord in his peripheral vision. "Akama, what do you see?" Illidan asked. "I see Magtheridon bound. I see great spells in place to hold him. I see you standing in triumph over your fallen foe." Illidan smiled. "Are you not curious as to why I have preserved him?" "I am, Lord." Magtheridon's gurgling laugh boomed through the room. It was pained but there was wicked mirth in it. "He wants my blood, Broken one. But not the same way you do." Akama frowned. The shadows of his cowl would have hidden his expression from a normal-sighted individual, but Illidan had no trouble
perceiving it. "What does this creature mean, Lord?" "He is essentially correct. Among other uses, his blood contains the secret to creating fel orcs. It can be distilled into an elixir that gives the orcs might and ferocity." "Why would you wish to do that, master?" Akama asked. "Because I have need of an army, loyal Akama. The Burning Legion is coming for us, and the demons must be opposed." He slammed his fist into his open palm. "They must be defeated. No matter what it takes. No matter what it costs." "But creating more of those foul creatures is ... an abomination, Lord Illidan. Forgive me for speaking so bluntly, but it is true." "You have outraged your pet's sensibilities, little Illidan," Magtheridon boomed. "And not for the first time, I must tell you. He is a sensitive creature. Treacherous, too. I can read his heart even if you are too blind to see it." Illidan spoke a word of power that clamped Magtheridon's jaw shut. Only muffled groans and unintelligible gasps emerged from him. Illidan had his doubts about Akama, as he had his doubts about every one of his followers, but he would not let that show. There was no sense in allowing Magtheridon to undermine Akama's loyalty with thoughts that he might be under suspicion. "We need a mighty army, Akama, and we need it quickly. Otherwise we will be overwhelmed by the force that the Legion can bring to bear. Now do what I tell you to do when I tell you to do it." Akama placed his hands together and made a bow that set his facial tentacles to touching the ground. Illidan spread his arms wide, and his wings wider still, and brandished a Warglaive of Azzinoth in each fist. He chanted words, and the forces of magic bent to his will. Magtheridon struggled against his bindings, enormous muscles flexing as he tried the strength of his chains. It seemed that the pit lord was not quite as sanguine as he tried to appear at the prospect of the bloodletting. Illidan strode forward, bounding into the air, wings flexed to hold him there for a moment. He twisted through the movements of an enormous ritual dance, circling ever closer to Magtheridon, blades spinning in his hands. All the while he crooned evil words in the ancient language of demons. Trails of
fire appeared behind his blades as he spun them, weaving an intricate net of energy. He reached Magtheridon and slashed. The blades bit chunks from the demon's flesh. Green blood dripped from the wounds, dribbled down the pit lord's columnar legs, and puddled at his feet. Illidan moved around and slashed again, drawing more blood. His blades never sank in beyond a few inches-each blow little more than a scratch on the demon's thick hide-but more and more blood came forth. A few droplets sprayed his face. The smell of it made Illidan lick his lips. The tang set his tongue to tingling. Strength flowed into him. The demon's blood was like a drug. He fought down the urge to plunge his hands into the pool and lap it up. The strength it granted was not worth the price he would have to pay. What does it matter? part of him asked. There was no greater pleasure than drinking the blood of his demonic enemies and imbibing their power. He needed it. It would enable him to kill ever more demons and absorb their energy until the moment he was strong enough to take on Kil'jaeden himself. Out of the corner of his vision, he caught sight of Akama's horrified face. It reminded him that there was another purpose here than mere enjoyment. He needed this blood for other reasons. He needed it to make his army, to give the orc clans surrounding him the strength they craved to overcome their foes and his. "Now, Akama!" he shouted. "Bind the blood. Set it flowing into the channels." Akama cast the spell. The blood responded sluggishly. The demonic taint within it resisted Akama. The plasma swirled and split, flowing into new streams that filled the channels carved in the floor. Akama's magic grew and drew on more and more power. The spurts formed whirling patterns in the air and flowed down into the vents. The blood pulsed through a system of pipes to be gathered in alchemical tanks. Illidan smiled. He had collected the first of what he needed. The spell would be self-sustaining for hours. It was time to get to work.
* * *
ILLIDAN STRODE THROUGH THE long gallery, gazing down at the orcs lying on gurneys there. Pipe connected each to a tank of bubbling greenish fluid,
pumping it into their veins. Runes cut into their flesh guided the magic. Scuttling, bent-backed mo'arg servitors moved from orc to orc, checking the procedure. Their metallic claws clinked against the tubes. Their demonic eyes glinted with unholy glee. Akama watched with unconcealed disgust on his face. "This is an abomination, Lord Illidan," he said. "So you have said. But it is necessary." "Are you absolutely sure of that, Lord?" "Are you absolutely sure you wish to face the consequences of questioning me?" Magtheridon's blood still affected Illidan. Subtle anger twisted his mind. It was one of the dangers of what he had been attempting. "I mean no disrespect, Lord." An orc stirred in his sleep, grinding his teeth and flexing his fingers as he writhed in the grip of some dark nightmare. Doubtless he, too, was feeling the effects of the pit lord's blood, and he was receiving it in a distilled and magically enhanced form. His skin was blotched an angry red. The epidermis seemed thicker and had a raw look to it. Muscles bulged and nails had become claws. A faint glow was visible even through his closed eyelids. "They grow larger and heavier as we go down the line," Akama said. "It is the effects of the serum. It will make them stronger and faster. It will ensure they heal quicker." "But at what price, master?" "They will be foul and fierce, quick to anger and quick to kill. They will be filled with rage and hatred and a hunger for battle." "Is there no way we can mitigate those side effects while preserving the changes we need?" "We will need them all. You have seen what the Burning Legion is like. You have felt its wrath. We need to be just as fierce and just as deadly if we are to have any chance." "You think the Legion can be defeated here, Lord?" "I believe they can be held here." "You seek then only to preserve your homeworld of Azeroth, and to do that you would turn this world into a battleground." "This world is already a battleground, Akama. And, no, I do not seek only to defend Azeroth. I want to preserve us all." "And how do you intend to do that, Lord? By turning us into that which
we oppose?" Akama gestured meaningfully at the recumbent orc. His brow was lower. His fangs were larger. His eyes snapped open and he reached up to grab at Illidan, breaking the strap that held him to the gurney. The grip was strong and the clawlike nails bit deep. Illidan shrugged him off and brought his hand down on the orc's windpipe, breaking it. As the creature writhed, Illidan snapped his neck with one twist. He then looked at Akama and smiled. The fel blood still affected him. He had enjoyed the kill. "That one was a little too fierce, I think." "I thought there could be no such thing against those we face." Illidan laughed. "I like you, Akama, but do not try my patience. I am not here to play games with words. I am here to win a war." "We all are, Lord. Let us hope that we are all fighting the same one."
* * *
AKAMA WATCHED FROM THE battlements as the first of the new army emerged from the gates of Hellfire Citadel. A week had passed since Illidan had begun the creation of the new batch of fel orcs. Tens of thousands of transformed fighters strode in time, cursing and howling and grunting. They brandished their weapons in rough salute as they saw Illidan watching. He acknowledged it with a lazy wave. He seemed satisfied. His military power grew. He no longer needed to rely on the backing of Kael'thas and Vashj. He had armies now to match his sorcerous strength. He truly was the lord of Outland. "They will establish control of all the lands of Hellfire Peninsula," Illidan said. "Then we shall close the Legion's gates and slow the demons' advance by another increment." "I sincerely hope so, Lord," Akama said. Now more than ever he was convinced that he had made a deal with a demon. It was an insane plan to transform the orcs. Illidan was simply turning himself into a new Magtheridon. Indeed, he might prove to be something worse. "When that happens, will you return the Temple of Karabor to my people, Lord?" "Of course, Akama. Never doubt it." Akama did, however. He touched the rune-carved stone he kept in his pouch, feeling the magic in it and thinking about the night elf warden who bore its twin.
"Make ready to depart," Illidan said. "Tomorrow we return to the Black Temple."
* * *
ILLIDAN STRODE INTO THE Chamber of Command, his council's meeting room at the Black Temple. Akama hobbled along behind him. Several Broken scuttled around, putting the last of the fittings into place. Great tapestries woven with Illidan's symbol hung from the wall. An enormous table showing a carved three-dimensional map of Outland dominated the space. A group of blood elves huddled around it. They turned and made obeisance as soon as they saw Illidan. Clearly his sudden appearance had taken them by surprise. The beautiful Lady Malande raised her hand in a languid salute. "Lord Illidan, Prince Kael'thas regrets he could not be present. He has taken a force to close the Legion's gate in the Netherstorm and-" Before she could complete her explanation, High Nethermancer Zerevor butted in. "The magical defenses of the temple have been rewoven, Lord Illidan. They were in a disgraceful state, but-" Gathios the Shatterer, broad for a blood elf and encased in the heavy armor of a paladin, interrupted, "There is no sign of Legion activity in Shadowmoon Valley, Lord Illidan. The gates remain as closed as the day we sealed them, and there have been no indications of demonic manifestation." Veras Darkshadow leaned back against the table and folded his scarred arms across his chest. Alone among his comrades, he apparently did not feel the urge to fight for Illidan's attention. Illidan shook his head. These blood elves seemed to have nothing better to do than plot against one another for his favor. It was no wonder that Kael'thas had left them behind. Still, they were efficient organizers and brilliant in their respective fields. They represented the absolute best of the sin'dorei forces in Outland. They had taken to calling themselves the Illidari Council, a measure perhaps of their self-importance. Illidan raised his hand and stared at them until they fell silent. "We are at war with the Burning Legion," he said to Gathios. "Need I remind you that the demon lord Kil'jaeden is displeased with me? He will make his displeasure felt soon enough."
Silence settled on the chamber like a shroud. The only sound was Akama's wheezing breath. The sin'dorei looked afraid. That was good, Illidan thought. Fear might keep them all alive. He tilted his head so that Zerevor was aware that he had his full attention. "Are you certain that the wards are ready? They may soon be put to the test." Zerevor took a deep breath and considered his words carefully. "They are, Lord Illidan. I would bet my life on it." "That is good," Illidan said. "Because you are doing that. You are betting all our lives on it." Illidan turned to Malande. "Send a message to Prince Kael'thas apprising him of the situation. I do not want him taking any unnecessary risks. After me, he is the one Kil'jaeden is most likely to strike at." "It shall be done, Lord Illidan. I shall see to it at once." "Veras-you have done as I asked?" "Of course, Lord Illidan. Our best trackers have scoured the routes to Hellfire Citadel and questioned the fel orc clan leaders. A number of night elves were sighted on the heights above the road on the day of your triumphal procession. They killed a group of fel orcs and made their escape. One of them wore burnished armor of the sort Warden Shadowsong wears." Illidan bared his fangs, and his underlings flinched. He had been right. He had seen Maiev that day. He should have scoured the hills immediately, but it had taken all his power to restrain Magtheridon, and he had not been absolutely certain it was her. The need to impress the clans with his strength had outweighed his suspicions. It would not have looked strong to disrupt the triumphal march of his entire army to search for a few night elves. Still, it was galling to think that she had been so close. "You will find Maiev Shadowsong for me, Veras. You will assign agents to follow up on every rumor of her presence. I am keen to repay her for the hospitality she extended to me." "At once, Lord Illidan." Veras padded silently from the chamber. "And you, Gathios. I want you to ensure that our sentries are alert, and that a force is ready to respond to any threat." "It is already done, Lord Illidan." Gathios paused for a moment. "I have taken the liberty of surveying the Black Temple's defenses for weak points. The sewer outflows represent one particularly easy point of attack. In your absence I consulted with Lady Vashj. She suggested that one of her
champions, High Warlord Naj'entus, should guard the sewers, along with a picked force of her people." "It is an unpleasant duty but a necessary one," Illidan said. "Then you approve, Lord Illidan?" "Of course. You have all done well. Let us hope you have done enough." Akama, Gathios, Malande, and Zerevor filtered from the chamber to be about their duties, leaving Illidan to contemplate the map of Outland. Soon armies would be moving about it and war would ravage the land. He had better prepare. He had much to do and little time to do it in. This was the moment to move to the next phase of his plan. He must recruit others like him-those willing to hunt the Legion by becoming what they hated most.
CHAPTER SIX Five Months Before the Fall
VANDEL STALKED THROUGH THE DARK LANDSCAPE of Shadowmoon Valley. Behind him, the huge volcano known as the Hand of Gul'dan grumbled. The blazing contrails of enormous green meteors scratched the face of the sky as they crashed downward. The earth trembled like a frightened beast on their impact. In the distance, the gigantic walls of the Black Temple loomed. Vandel touched the hilts of his scabbarded daggers, then rubbed his weary eyes to remove the ash and grit. He had come a long way to find Illidan's new home. He had come a long way in search of vengeance. The image of his dead son flickered through his mind. There had been very little left of Khariel's body once the felhound was finished with it. He touched the silver leaf he had given the child for his third and last birthday to make sure it still hung from his neck. Even after five years, the memory burned white hot. He ground his teeth and let the wave of hatred sweep through him. It would have been better for him if he had died that day along with his family and the rest of his village. He should have been with them, but instead he was in the woods hunting when the alarm horns sounded. He had raced back through the forest, leaping over the fallen trees, the smell of burning bright in his nostrils. He pushed the memory down. It was far too easy to give in to it. He had done so many times in the past and been driven to the edge of madness and beyond. In his lucid moments, he admitted that. No sane elf would have spent long years tracking the Betrayer, ferreting out the secrets of those who had followed him. No sane elf would have passed through that magical portal and come to this hellish land. The wall loomed before him. He crept forward, taking advantage of every patch of shadow. There were many sentries and many warding spells. The
Black Temple was a fortress girded for war, and he did not want to be cut down by its guardians before he had finished his business with its master. Gigantic stones had been piled high to form the outer wall. Here and there clumps of moss clung to them. In places, wind and rain and meteor strikes had eroded the ancient blocks, leaving cracks that could be exploited by someone who had learned to climb amid the great trees of Ashenvale. He sprang as high as he could reach, digging his fingers into the first gap he spotted and pulling himself up. He hung there for a moment, feeling as if his arm would be pulled out of its socket. Below, a patrol of fel orcs marched closer. He would have offered up a prayer to Elune if he had any faith that the goddess's benevolence could reach this foul place. Instead he made his mind a blank and continued scrambling up the wall, hoping that he would not be overheard by any sentry waiting above. That did not seem likely. Shadowmoon Valley was a riot of noise. He doubted that any guard could hear him over the thunder of the volcano and the roar of the wind. Nonetheless he allowed himself a moment of stillness and strained his keen ears for any clue that he might have been observed. Beneath him, the patrol went about its rounds. Vandel looked down into the pools of shadow, and just for a moment he felt the urge to let go. The long drop would break his neck and end his agony. He could join his family in death and end the torment. He resisted the urge. He could not rest while his son was unavenged. His hatred was stronger than his desire for endless peace. He pulled himself over the edge of the battlements, rolled down onto the balcony behind, and lay in the shadows, catching his breath. So far no sentinels. He felt a brief moment of triumph. He had succeeded where an army would have failed. He had broken into the unholy precincts of the Black Temple. A batwinged shadow passed across the moon. It seemed that all his wishes were to be granted tonight. Illidan, the Betrayer himself, soared aloft on the night wind. It seemed that he, too, was restless this evening. No doubt there were many things that kept him awake. Perhaps his dark deeds caused nightmares that kept him from his bed. How long had it been since Vandel had slept without nightmares? He could not recall. All he could remember were the terrible dreams. He touched
Khariel's amulet once more. Not long, my son, not long. Illidan settled upon a balcony atop the highest tower of the Black Temple. He paced for nine steps, turned, and then shook his head. He leaned against the banister, surveying everything as far as the horizon. Vandel wondered whether the Betrayer could see him. His sightless eyes were known to perceive things that others could not. What would Illidan do if he knew that Vandel was there? It would not be difficult to reach the tower upon which Illidan stood. The few sentinels scattered along the battlements did not seem completely awake. They were secure in the strength of the walls protecting them. Doubtless they did not expect someone like him. They were there to watch for armies and demons, not a solitary night elf maddened by grief and overmastered by the thirst for revenge. He stalked forward, telling himself not to be overconfident. Perhaps there were other sentries and he had just not seen them. The long years of hunting the foes of his people had taught him stealth beyond that of most mortals, but he was far from the only one who could hide in shadows. Perhaps even now some deadly sentry watched him unseen and prepared to drive a dagger into his back. Once more he paused to consider the fact that he might no longer be sane. His mind had shattered once, at the moment he had found his son's corpse being gnawed upon by the felhound. For a moment he could almost smell the scent of burning wood, and night elf blood. He could almost hear the crunching of small bones. He let out a whimper, then cursed silently. Anyone within earshot might have heard. He did not intend to be struck down by a guard because of his own foolishness. No more mistakes. From here on he would concentrate on the mission ahead. He reached the foot of the tower upon which Illidan stood. Ahead, a ramp curled out of sight around the side of the tower. He prayed that luck was still with him and ran, preferring to trust in speed and stealth and his unexpected good fortune. He reached the top. The one he had come long leagues to find stood before him. Illidan's back was turned. His massive wings clung close to his body as if trying to warm him against the chill of the night. He held his great horned
head low as he surveyed the distant lights of the great volcano. What was he looking for? What did he see with his eyeless sight? Illidan turned as if he had known Vandel was there the whole time. Vandel drew his daggers, checked the mystic runes etched into them, and padded forward. He knelt, and placed his blades at Illidan's hooves. "Forgive the intrusion, Lord Illidan. I did not wish to risk being cut down by your sentries before I had spoken to you." Illidan said, "What do you wish of me, nightstalker?" "I want to slay those who slew my family. I want to slaughter your enemies." "There is no shortage of those." Vandel said, "I wish to learn what you have learned. I want to hunt demons." "Then you have much to learn, and the hour is late." "Will you teach me?" "You and a thousand like you. Go below. Rest. You will find what you seek. Or die in the attempt." Illidan turned his back once more and returned to gazing at the horizon. It was clear to Vandel that he was dismissed.
* * *
UNCERTAIN AS TO WHAT he was supposed to do, Vandel strode down to the base of the tower. Two tattooed figures waited for him. It seemed as if they had been there all along. They were not surprised to see him, nor did they draw any weapons. One was a tall female with a scarred face. She appeared to be a night elf, yet she had demonic features. Green flames flickered in her empty eye sockets. Small horns curled from her head. Her scanty clothing revealed glittering tattoos that covered her body. Some magic about them drew Vandel's eye and compelled him to try to unravel the pattern as if it were a complex puzzle. She noticed his look, and her lips twisted to reveal small fangs. Vandel met her cold smile with one of his own, feeling as if somehow he was being tested, as if they were crossing blades in a soundless struggle.
The second figure, also night elven in form, paid no attention to him at all, and Vandel would have been surprised if he did. His eyelids were sewn shut, as were his lips. He was hunched forward, with his head held low and his shoulders high. He was stripped to the waist, revealing even more tattoos than his companion had. A broad leather belt wrapped around his waist held a selection of long, sharp needles, from the ends of which dangled strings of animal hide. Their tips were blotched, and a look at the male's body revealed the fact that he had recently pierced his skin. The crust on the needles' points was dried blood, most likely his own. "You have spoken with Lord Illidan," the female said. There was a jealous note in her husky voice. It sounded as if something was wrong with her larynx, as if she had once screamed so loud and so long that she had done it permanent damage. "Yes," Vandel said. He did not care for her knowing smile. He was not going to let himself be intimidated. "You are privileged indeed." "Am I?" "He does not greet every supplicant personally. It seems he has some memory of you. Perhaps he has something special in mind." The male raised a finger to his lips, as if she had said too much. A long talon extruded from its tip. The gesture was not threatening, but it was not reassuring, either. The blind male scratched his chin, drawing a bead of blood onto the claw. He put it into his mouth through a tiny aperture left by the thread. "I would not presume to read Lord Illidan's mind," Vandel said. "You show more wisdom than I expected." "Do you have a name?" "I am Elarisiel. He is Needle. If he had another name, it is long since forgotten, even by him." Vandel bowed to them both. Elarisiel laughed, malice glittering in her voice. Needle bobbed his head without mockery. Vandel stared hard at him. Obviously the male had no more difficulty seeing than Lord Illidan. What was going on here? "Lord Illidan told us to take you below." Tension tightened Vandel's shoulder blades. "And how did he tell you that?"
"You will find out, eventually, if you live." Needle produced one of his long, sharp pins and pierced it into the flesh of his own forearm. He dug around for a minute. Another droplet of blood appeared. He poked the point through the small gap between his lips and made a sucking sound. A blissful look appeared on his face. Vandel had come here doubting his own sanity. Now he doubted that of everyone around him.
* * *
THE PAIR LED HIM through a maze of corridors. They passed through a small sally port in the wall of the Black Temple and out into a vast heap of tumbledown ruins. "This was once part of the Temple of Karabor," Elarisiel said. "The orcs and the demons did not leave a great deal of the original structure standing. What they did, Lord Illidan and his champions took. We dwell here now under the watchful gaze of Varedis and his companions." "Varedis?" Vandel asked. "The master tutor," Elarisiel said, but she did not seem inclined to amplify on her remark. More green meteors scarred the face of the sky as Vandel and his guides passed through a series of terraces. Silken pavilions rose along their length. From them came the sounds of mad laughter. They passed through the camp and came eventually to a tunnel mouth in a ruined wall. Chill air surrounded them as they walked down worn, ancient steps and emerged into a huge hall. It looked like an asylum or a battlefield hospital. Elves sprawled everywhere. Some lay in pools of greenish light cast by flickering fel lanterns. It made them look sick. Some of the males were bearded and greenhaired after the fashion of night elves; some were clean-shaven like the sin'dorei. Some muttered to one another. Some huddled in the shadows between the lanterns as if trying to conceal themselves. Most slept fitfully, talking in their sleep. A mad scream sounded, and a female rose up and raced through the chamber, shouting, "Worms, worms, worms!" The shout roused many from sleep, but they did not seem disturbed by it. Only one tall blood elf rose from the soiled cloak in which he lay wrapped,
and he chased the maniac through the chamber. They disappeared out of sight. "As you can see, you are not the only one who has found their way here. Many have sought out Lord Illidan. Only a few will live to enter his service." "What do you mean?" Elarisiel's silvery laugh rang out. "You will find out soon enough, kaldorei. Pick out any place and get some rest. You will need your strength for the trials ahead." She spun on her heel and departed. Needle raised a finger to his forehead and turned his hand through a half circle, then stepped back into a shadow and seemed to simply vanish. "Do not pay too much attention to Elarisiel," said a friendly voice from nearby. "She just likes to scare the new recruits. I suspect someone did the same to her when she first came here, and she likes to spread the misery." Vandel inspected the speaker. He had the ageless look of a mature night elf, which meant he could be any age from twenty years to fifteen thousand. As far as Vandel could see, he had no scars or tattoos. When he considered the matter and then looked around, he saw that none of the others in the hall did, either. The speaker continued. "You are a thoughtful one. And I know what you are thinking ..." The unspoken question hung in the air. "Vandel is my name." "Elune shines on the moment of our meeting, Vandel. I am Ravael." "I am pleased to make your acquaintance. You were about to tell me what I was thinking. I am curious to know, since I am unsure myself." "You are thinking what every newcomer who has ever been led into this hall thinks. That the guides are strange. You are also wondering why none of us have tattoos and all of us have eyes." "There are more like that pair, then." "Oh yes, my friend. Lots more. Lord Illidan is building an army of the blind." "Only they are not blind, are they?" "No." "And they have tattoos like his, only less intricate." "Yes."
"And they are changed in ways he has changed." "You are observant." "I would have to be blind not to notice these things," Vandel said before realizing the ridiculousness of that statement. "You think the blind here see less well than you?" Ravael asked, and just for a moment a note of hysteria sounded in his voice. Vandel was almost glad. Until that moment, Ravael had seemed so normal as to be out of place in this madhouse. "I think they probably see more. They had no trouble guiding me here, or avoiding anyone in their way. It is possible to memorize routes, but I cannot imagine everyone in this hall occupies the same place the whole time." "You have thought things through, it seems." "What are you doing here?" "I came to take vengeance, to learn to fight demons. The same reason you are here, I am guessing." Vandel considered that for a moment. "Perhaps Elarisiel was right. Perhaps I am not so special." "I am sure you are. After all, you got here without dying. How common do you think that is?" Vandel took a deep breath and looked around again. He had assumed that everyone here was mad or an invalid, but he could see now that many of them bore scars, and all of them had weapons close at hand. There were warriors here, and magi, and hunters. "You lost someone?" Vandel asked. "I lost everything," said Ravael. He made no move to expand on that. Thinking of his own loss, Vandel saw no reason to prod him. "I know what that feels like," he said. Ravael looked around. "Somehow, though, in this place, I feel we have even more to lose."
CHAPTER SEVEN Five Months Before the Fall
MAIEV FELT ALMOST RELAXED. CLEFTHOOF MEAT filled her belly. The long, sunny day had provided rare sport as she and her followers hunted the beasts. Enough hide lay nearby to make armor for a score of draenei soldiers. A few of them picked through it, sawing away with knives, flensing the skin. It reminded her of her long-gone youth, when she had hunted in the woods with her mother. They had made their own clothes then, cut from leather, sewn with needles of bone, using thread of sinew. The memory brought a brief smile to her face and then the return of horror. Her mother was dead, killed by the Burning Legion. That thought sent her mind circling back once more to Illidan. The Betrayer was still at large, and his power was growing. The strength of his legions mocked her own efforts. She tried to blank her mind, reclaim her earlier good mood. It had been a long time since she had experienced a moment of unalloyed happiness. She liked this Nagrand. The air was clean and the sky was blue and the wind was fresh. It was not like the forests of her homeland, but as long as you did not look too closely, it felt natural. Of course, you could still see the effects of the world-splitting magic that had been inflicted on Draenor. Huge islands floated in the sky, hovering on the wind. It seemed as if at any moment, they might crash to the earth-but they did not. According to the locals, they had been stable for years. And even here there were rumors of Illidan's war with his demonic masters. It seemed that the Burning Legion had established bases in the far west of Nagrand, and the demons were preparing some new attack. Anyndra lay on her stomach near the fire, playing an improvised game of nexus with Sarius, using a hexagonal board slashed into the earth and stones
of different colors. The lieutenant saw Maiev looking at her and raised her hand in salute. Her hair was bleached almost lime green by the Outland sun, and her skin was desiccated. Her tunic was patched in a dozen places. Like the rest of the surviving Watchers, she had refused to part with it. It was a connection with their home, and there were few enough of those left. Sarius remained focused on the game. He was competitive in everything. He had acquired a dozen new scars. Some of them were pale and old, but two were from more recent skirmishes. They had been deep wounds. Druids healed quickly and easily from most injuries. Maybe he had left them as they were as reminders or tributes to his vanity. Males could be like that sometimes. They liked to have scars to flaunt and tell tales about. The two had proved to be loyal and good soldiers in the years they had roamed through Outland seeking the key to Illidan's destruction. They had kept Maiev's troops alive under very trying circumstances. She cursed when she thought of all the months they had wasted scouting the grounds around Hellfire Citadel, making war with the naga in Zangarmarsh, watching the walls of the Black Temple. It felt as if they had achieved nothing. Illidan's power had increased a thousandfold during that period. She glanced around her camp. Her force had grown but she could not yet call it an army. It numbered in the hundreds and consisted mainly of disaffected draenei youths recruited on her travels. There were always those who saw the need to oppose evil and the threat Illidan represented. Not enough, though. What had she really achieved here? Nothing. Over the years, Illidan had grown ever stronger. For every draenei who joined her, a hundred orcs marched into his citadel and emerged transformed into even more brutal, powerful fighters. There were fools out there who believed that he opposed the Legion, and they joined him willingly. They did not know him as well as she did. She knew that he was summoning more and more demons from the Twisting Nether and binding them to his will. There could be no good purpose to that. Illidan played some deep game here. She could not see the logic of it, but she knew it must be there. There were those who claimed that Kil'jaeden sought his head. Perhaps the demon lord did. It would not be the first time that evildoers had fallen out with each other. Illidan had switched sides before, though, and he would do so again when it suited him. His evil nature
would always win out. He had corrupted everything he ever touched. This time would be no different. A commotion sounded at the edge of the camp. The sentries were challenging someone. Weapons sprang into her troops' hands. Every Watcher stood ready. Maiev moved to investigate. Ogres had been spotted in this area, but she doubted it was them. Fighting would already have erupted. She raced closer and saw a group of unfamiliar Broken, garbed as hunters. They exchanged words with one of the sentries. They did not look hostile. But it might be a trick. Maiev circled behind them, scouting the area. There were no signs of any enemy infiltration. No Broken hid in the shadows. In the distance she heard the growl of a nightsaber. A wind elemental roared across the evening sky. She stepped out of the shadows. The strangers' leader flinched at her sudden appearance, but he recovered his composure. "Greetings," he said. "What is going on here?" Maiev said. "We could ask you the same thing. You are on Kurenai land, eating Kurenai beasts. It seems to me that we should be asking the questions." Maiev had heard of the Kurenai; they were another faction of Broken, one that owed no allegiance to Akama and his Ashtongue tribe. "I saw no brand on these clefthoof; there were no herders, either." "These are our hunting grounds. We have not given you guest rights." Maiev considered this. With calculated insolence she ran her eyes over the newcomers, making it clear she was counting their numbers. She then looked at her own force. The strangers were outnumbered by twenty to one. The Broken laughed. "You have an army. The people of Telaar also have an army if things come to that. Our army is bigger than yours." "But it is not here," said Maiev. Anyndra emerged from the gathering gloom. A shriek told her that Sarius was watching from on high, changed into the shape of a bird. "It could be. If I sounded this horn." "I could put an arrow through your eye before it reached your lips," Anyndra said. Maiev glared at her. Now was not the time for displays of archery prowess. There was nothing to be gained by picking a fight with these Broken. "We meant to give no offense," Maiev said. "We are strangers passing
through this land, and we sought only food and shelter." "You should have come to Telaar. Our people would have provided you with both, and perhaps other things beside." The Broken looked at her camp again. "So many young draenei led by so few strangers. There is a story here that Arechron would like to hear." Maiev perked up at that. Perhaps there were allies to be gained-maybe even an entire army. "I am sure we have much to tell each other. If it suits you, I will guide my people to your city and have words with your Arechron." "I will leave some of my people to be your guides as I go ahead to give notice of your coming." Maiev hoped he was not merely heading off to prepare a trap.
* * *
TELAAR WAS AN IMPRESSIVELY fortified place. Situated on top of a flat mountain peak that rose above a deep valley, it had no need of walls. The only approaches were over rope bridges or from the air. Unless they used magic or flyers, any foe would find it a difficult place to besiege. The rope bridge swayed beneath the paws of Maiev's nightsaber. The great cat stalked on, but she could sense its pulse increase as it looked down. Through the slats of the bridge, Maiev could see the ground a long way below. If the Broken wanted to kill her people, all they would have to do was cut the ropes supporting the bridge. Of course, that would mean killing the Broken and draenei with them. Maiev had known enough leaders willing to sacrifice their own people to achieve their ends that she did not discount the possibility. A crowd lined the edges of the town, trying to get a glimpse of the approaching force. They did not push or shove one another, but they did not have the lassitude she had come to associate with the Broken, either. They appeared to be armed and no doubt would fight if they had to. It was with a sense of relief that Maiev rode off from the bridge. She paused to look over her shoulder and check on her people. She was happy to see that they were still there. Apparently Arechron planned no treachery. Not yet, anyway.
In the middle of the crowd, surrounded by spear-bearers, stood a particularly huge Broken of noble aspect. He was garbed in impressive armor of orange and purple. Four long tendrils descended from his face. His tail swished as he moved. "Achal hecta, and welcome to Telaar," he said. "I am Arechron and I would give you welcome in my house." Maiev said, "I thank you for your hospitality and look forward to speaking with you." They rode along the mosaic-patterned road, through the open spaces of Telaar. Around them rose the odd, domed buildings so typical of draenei architecture. Maiev studied it all with the eye of a veteran fighter. She noted the areas where ambushes might be sprung or archers could be placed. Every moment, she half expected to be attacked. She had spent so long in the field these past few years that every town felt like a trap, and every citizen a potential enemy. The knowledge saddened her, but she did not relax her vigilance.
* * *
MAIEV GLANCED ACROSS THE low table, studying Arechron. The Broken had an open, honest face and a welcoming manner, but she had long ago learned that such things could be deceptive. She was determined not to let down her guard even for a moment, although she gave no sign of her suspicions. The chamber walls curved. Thick carpets lay strewn on the floor. A Broken boy pulled aside a beaded curtain and stared in, quite clearly fascinated by the newcomer. Maiev met his gaze. "Corki," said Arechron, "go to sleep. It is past your bedtime and I have business to discuss with our new friend." "Yes, Father," said Corki. He made no move to go. "Corki!" "Yes, Father?" "Do as you are told, or there will be consequences." "Yes, Father." The child's hooves clopped on the stone floor as he skipped away. "He is a good boy, but I indulge him too much," Arechron said. Maiev agreed, but it did not seem politic to say so. "You are his father."
"I worry about him sometimes," Arechron said. Maiev saw her opportunity. "As a parent, you have a lot to worry about. We live in dark times, and they are getting darker." Arechron nodded his head. "You speak the truth, but the Light will preserve us. It always has, and it always will." "I wish I shared your faith," Maiev said. Before she could say anything further, the Broken interrupted her. "Faith in the Light is open to all. All you need do is believe." Maiev saw a quagmire of theological debate yawning before her. "Oh, I am sure that the Light watches over us. I am not so sure that it can protect us for very much longer. The Betrayer seeks dominion over Outland. Already he has recruited tens of thousands of fel orcs and other monstrous beings. I have seen the naga working on great magical engines amid the waters of Coilfang Reservoir. I cannot believe that they are up to anything good. I know their leader, Lady Vashj. Believe me, she is wicked." Maiev let her sense of urgency show in her voice. It was a speech she had given many times before, and it had succeeded in convincing the draenei youths who had joined her force. But Arechron was not a youth. He was an experienced leader, albeit with a sentimental weakness for his son. That was her best line of attack. "If you wish your child to have a safe future, you must do something soon, before Illidan the Betrayer has overwhelming forces at his disposal." Arechron raised both hands in her direction, palms out. He gave her a good-humored smile and said, "You do not need to convince me of the threat that Illidan poses." "Then I can count upon your help in the coming struggle." Arechron gave a small shrug. "It is not quite that simple." Maiev forced a smile upon her face. "I find that such is nearly always the case in Outland." "I have heard of you, Maiev the warden. I have heard of the way you go from town to town and village to village in search of soldiers for your crusade against the one you call the Betrayer. I have heard that some of the younger and more impetuous draenei follow you. I am neither young nor impetuous." Maiev was tempted to add nor a fighter, but she clamped her mouth shut and kept her smile in place. She was not back on Azeroth now. She could not
simply show up and expect help as she could among her own people. The Broken needed to be convinced to do the right thing. She was used to this reaction from the draenei elders. They were very conservative people and very cautious. The younger ones were braver. That seemed to be the case wherever she went. "Believe me, I would like to aid you, Maiev. I think that you are right about how powerful Illidan is. I do not wish to draw the attention of such a being to my small town." "You are afraid," Maiev said. "I am not ashamed to admit it, but not in the way that you think." "Fear is fear. If you allow it to rule you, it does not matter what you are afraid of." "It is very easy for you, is it not? You ride from place to place, spinning your web of words, and young fighters follow you. You do not have to think of the consequences of your actions. You do not have to think about our young people dying." Maiev stared hard at him. "Many of my people have given their lives to end Illidan's reign of terror. The night elves you see outside, my officers, are what remain of the mighty force that once followed me in pursuit of the Betrayer." Arechron steepled his fingers and nodded. "You can fight your guerrilla war and disappear into the wastes to escape the wrath of your foe. I cannot. My people cannot. We have homes here in Telaar. We have children." "I wondered why you introduced him into the conversation so early." Arechron made a curt gesture with his right hand, then shrugged. "You are a cynical and wrathful night elf, but I think that you are also a righteous one. That is why I will give you whatever aid I can. I will provide you with supplies and weapons. I will allow you to recruit whoever wishes to follow you among our youths, provided only that you leave the town guards out of your efforts at persuasion. We need them here to protect us from our enemies." Maiev considered his words. It was obvious that Arechron did not wish to be drawn into open conflict with Illidan. But it was equally obvious that he was no friend to the Betrayer, either. Under the circumstances, that would have to do. She allowed some real warmth to show in her smile. "I appreciate the risk
that you are taking. And I am grateful for any help that you can give me." "Let us not misunderstand each other. War is coming. The day approaches when Illidan will turn his attention to Telaar. But that day has not come yet, and I would delay it for as long as possible. What you do, you do on your own." He reached down and poured some clear water into goblets. He offered one to her and took one himself. As if he guessed what she would think, he put his to his lips before she could drink hers. Maiev sniffed it and took a small taste on the tip of her tongue. She detected no drugs in it, so she took a sip. Arechron smiled. "Tell me, since you know Illidan so well, what do you think he is doing in Outland?" "Fleeing the justice that pursues him from Azeroth." "That goes without saying. I meant, specifically, what do you think he plans? Why does he build these mighty armies? Do you think he means to invade your homeworld, as the orcs did not so long ago?" "I think that is the most likely explanation. Illidan has ever sought glory and conquest. He lusts for such things almost as much as he lusts for forbidden knowledge." "It is said that he is a formidable sorcerer." "One of the greatest my people ever produced." It galled Maiev to have to utter such words. She despised the sort of magical power Illidan dealt in. "That is alarming. You can see the effect magic has had on our world. It shattered Draenor, cost the lives of millions." Arechron was afraid of the power Illidan's magic represented. It was a sensible attitude, albeit a cowardly one. "All the more reason Illidan must be opposed." "He has made pacts with the Burning Legion before?" "Whenever it has suited him." "And yet now he appears to make war on the Legion." "It appears that way, yes, but who can tell what is really happening here? It may be merely that there is strife within the Burning Legion. Perhaps the Betrayer's attempt to supplant Magtheridon has made him more enemies than he expected. Perhaps his superiors have decided to punish him. In any case, this dissent represents an opportunity for all who would see him overthrown." "Possibly, yes."
"You do not agree?" "I mean no insult, but I suspect you would find an opportunity to strike against your enemy under any circumstances." He paused for a moment. "There are those who might aid you in your quest. They, too, have great magical power." Maiev looked at him closely. "I do not seek an alliance with those who use blasphemous sorcery." "The naaru serve the Light. They derive their power from it." "The naaru?" "They came to Shattrath City recently. It seems to me that you might make common cause with them. They are no friends to your Illidan." "He is not my Illidan." "I meant no offense. My tongue is clumsy sometimes." "Tell me more of these naaru." "They are beings of Light, enormously powerful. They arrived in Shattrath mere months ago, attracted by the rites of worship that the Aldor priesthood performed within a ruined temple there. The naaru protect the city from demons." "They hold the Legion at bay, you say?" "Indeed. They have made Shattrath a sanctuary for those who oppose the demons. They are recruiting those who would fight against the servants of Kil'jaeden. You might do well there. You could become a general in their armies without any doubt." It certainly sounded promising. Maiev searched for a hidden purpose behind his words. Was he merely trying to get rid of her by directing her toward this Shattrath? Arechron's face held its usual expression of benevolence. He was hard to read. "I do not seek a position of power," Maiev said. "I seek only to see that the Betrayer gets his well-deserved punishment." "Of course, of course. I have once again misread the situation. Nonetheless I would advise you to seek out the naaru. Of all the forces opposing the Burning Legion in Outland, they are immeasurably the strongest." Perhaps the Broken was right. She had been wasting her time, wandering these wastelands and recruiting tiny handfuls of fighters. There was nothing
to be lost from contacting these new rulers of Shattrath, and perhaps much to be gained. "Tell me of Shattrath." "It was once a beautiful place, and may well become so again." That was not the sort of knowledge she had been seeking, but she restrained her impatience. "How may I find it, and whom should I speak to there?" Arechron smiled as if he had achieved his goal. "It is a long way northeast of here. You must seek the Terrace of Light and speak with A'dal. If you seek a place to stay, I can recommend an inn. A cousin of mine owns it. He will guide you right if you mention my name." They spoke of matters concerning the city long into the night.
* * *
MAIEV WATCHED THE RISING sun. This was a good hour to depart. It was going to be another clear, warm day. Her forces had enjoyed their weeks of rest within Telaar. She had recruited another five score young fighters from among the Broken and the draenei. They were at the edge of her force, mounted on their elekk. The massive quadrupeds dwarfed the riding cats of her own people and exhibited only the slightest nervousness at the presence of the great carnivores. A crowd as large as the one that greeted them on arrival had gathered to see them off. Many of its members seemed to be there to say goodbye to her new recruits. A few appeared to be attempting to discourage them from leaving. Maiev saw no point in trying to stop that. She did not want anyone with her who could be impelled to desert by the tears of family. Her troops needed to be made of sterner stuff. Arechron himself appeared, mounted on the howdah of a huge bejeweled elekk. He bowed to her and said, "Remember, seek out the Aldor. They are the strongest faction in Shattrath besides the naaru, and they are the ones most likely to aid you." "I will do that," Maiev said. Arechron nodded and said, "And if I were you, I would have nothing further to do with the Ashtongue and their leader. They are of little account."
Maiev doubted that. She had met Akama on many occasions since their initial contact, and she knew his power. She still did not trust the Broken, but he had not lied to her yet, as far as she could tell. Anyndra rode up beside her. Her gaze made it clear she was awaiting the order to depart. Maiev nodded. Anyndra sounded her horn. The nightsabers roared. The elekk trumpeted. The long line of soldiers departed Telaar, leaving the cheering, waving, crying throng behind them. Maiev wondered what she would really find in Shattrath.
CHAPTER EIGHT Four Months Before the Fall
VANDEL STOOD IN THE GREAT COURTYARD IN THE ruins of Karabor along with all the others. Hundreds of supplicants lined the terraces. They had been waiting for weeks for Illidan to return. No one knew where he was. Not even his closest followers understood the Betrayer's comings and goings. Vandel felt a growing sense of impatience. There had been long days of training under the guidance of tattooed fighters of the same ilk as Elarisiel and Needle. Golden-haired Varedis, arrogant and confident as a god, had lectured them on the nature of demons. Of him it was whispered he had infiltrated the Shadow Council and stolen its Book of Fel Names. Soft-spoken Alandien had laid out the tactics of infiltration. She claimed to have been trained by Illidan himself. Netharel, the oldest night elf among them, was the one who taught them about weapons. Despite being bowed with age, when he picked up a blade, he moved with the agility of youth. They had practiced with weapons, sparred with their fellow recruits, and gotten to know one another a little better, but Vandel had made no progress toward his goal. It sometimes seemed to him that he would have achieved far more in the way of vengeance by simply walking out the gate and attacking any one of the tens of thousands of the Burning Legion's servants that swarmed through Outland. Of course, that would have led to a swift death, and he would have achieved nothing of any account. The Legion had limitless numbers of such soldiers. Ravael stood beside him. They had stuck together since the night of Vandel's arrival. Compared with some of those present, Ravael seemed
normal. Over the past few weeks, Vandel had encountered most of the aspirants. All of them had stories to tell, and all of those were tales of horror. The majority of the recruits were blood elves sent by Prince Kael'thas to learn how to fight demons. There were far fewer kaldorei. Among the night elves was Seladan, who had come all the way from Eversong Woods. His body had been burned by a dozen fist blows from an infernal. The whole right side of his face had been caved in around the jawline. A night elf so burned should not have been able to move without pain, but somehow he did, as lithe as when he had been a village guard. Beautiful Isteth had lost all three of her children when the Burning Legion struck. She carried the burned corpse of her baby in a pouch against her chest. Vandel had pieced together her story from her ravings. There were nights when she could not stop screaming about the burning. One of the blood elves had tried to silence her forcibly. She had killed him with one blow of her knife. Mavelith smiled and smiled and smiled. He found everything funny. It was disconcerting when he laughed at nothing, or at the distress of some companion. There was something in his eyes that suggested he took pleasure from the pain of others. There was Cyana. She seemed almost normal except for her keenness to come to grips with the Legion. She never spoke of what the demons had done to her, but she gave the impression that she, too, thirsted for vengeance with all her being. Ravael said not to trust the blood elves. They had been twisted by their addiction to arcane magic. Vandel did not care. He did not pay any attention to the prejudices his own people had acquired since the Burning Legion's invasion. He had been too caught up in his own hate-driven quest. He knew one thing, though. All the elves here had reasons to hate the Burning Legion that went far beyond those of most who had suffered because of the demons. They were like him, and he felt an odd sense of companionship with them all. It was clear that he and his comrades were not the first to walk this path. There were others, who kept mostly to themselves or were sometimes seen practicing. They were a breed apart-marked by their tattoos and their scars and strange mutations. Not all of them seemed blind, but all of them had altered eyes. It marked
them as being part of a separate, elite group. The servants and soldiers around the Black Temple treated them with fear and exaggerated respect. The aspirants looked upon them with a mixture of awe and envy. They had something all of the supplicants wanted-poise and power and confidence. Mystery cloaked them. It hinted that they possessed other, unseen powers. Rumor had it that these tattooed soldiers had already slain demons. There were times when Vandel sensed the presence of the Burning Legion. He told himself it was because the Black Temple housed Illidan's bound servants, but sometimes he had the skin-crawling feeling of being watched by demons, and he would turn to see Needle or Elarisiel looking at him. The tattooed fighters with their strange vision made him deeply uneasy. It had been a long, long time since anything had caused him such disquiet. There were other tales among the aspirants-that Illidan himself had become part demon, that their tutors emulated him in all things, and that in order to slay demons, you had to become like them. The Black Temple itself was a profoundly disturbing place. It had been transformed from a shrine into something else by the presence of Magtheridon. Illidan's people, the so-called Illidari, had done nothing to change the atmosphere. For one who called himself a demon hunter, Illidan counted an enormous number of demons among his followers. Even amid the ruins of Karabor, gigantic batwinged doomguard stalked, polluting the stones with their hooves. Vandel had heard the bellowing of monsters echo from the Black Temple. Stories of succubi and satyrs abounded among the aspirants. Vandel was so deep in reverie that he did not notice the first time Ravael shook his shoulder. He turned to look when he became aware of the shaking, and his gaze followed his companion's pointing finger. Illidan stooped like a hawk, dropping from the darkening sky into the courtyard, as if they were his prey. Vandel stood his ground as the Betrayer landed in front of him, arresting his descent with a flap of his huge leathery wings. His sightless eyes seemed focused on the distance, but his taloned fingers pointed straight at the crowd. A mocking smile twisted the Betrayer's lips. "And now we begin." Begin what? Vandel wondered. So far it had all been weapons training and listening to his disturbed companions. Did this mean Illidan was finally ready to share his dark knowledge? Were they finally going to learn how to kill
demons, rather than simply spar with one another and listen to endless lectures from Varedis and his ilk? Illidan's cold smile vanished. "Take a look around you. There are more than five hundred of you here. By the time this is over, there will be less than a hundred." He paused to let that sink in; then he laughed. "You all swore you were willing to give your lives to strike at the Burning Legion. You now have a chance to prove that. Who will be the first?" At first there was no response. Everyone waited to see what the others would do. Now that the moment had come, no one wanted to break ranks and see what waited for them. Suspense and fear hung over the supplicants and paralyzed them. Vandel took a deep breath and stepped forward. "I will have my vengeance or I will die. Whatever is needed, I will do." Illidan nodded. Vandel thought that the Betrayer had expected this of him, or perhaps he was just imagining things. "Very well," he said. "Step into the summoning circle." Illidan gestured. Lines of fire etched a complex geometric pattern on the stone. Vandel passed into a vast pentacle surrounded by glowing runes. They pulsed with a meaning that he felt he could grasp if only he was given another heartbeat to contemplate them-yet somehow the meaning never came. As he watched, the symbols blurred hypnotically. His skin tingled. His mouth felt dry. Motes of greenish-yellow light swirled around him. Illidan spoke a word of power. Fel energy surged. The temperature dropped. The air shimmered and congealed, and a felhound materialized. Perhaps it was his imagination, but it bore a startling resemblance to the one that had killed his son, Khariel. The felhound shrieked and bounded toward him, long tentacles bobbing. Jaws gaped wide, revealing teeth like a shark's. Vandel drew his runic daggers and leapt to meet it, the similarity of the beast to his son's killer stoking his rage ever higher. His blades stabbed forward at the tentacles. He writhed to one side to avoid the snapping jaws. His blades made contact, slicing the sensory stalks. The felhound twisted, still attempting to bury its fangs into his flesh. His arm burned where the felhound's jaws made contact. Razor teeth
sliced his flesh. His thirst for vengeance had blinded him to the creature's surprising speed. He sprang backward and away. Something tingled at his back, and he found that he could not exit the circle. Magic imprisoned him, as if the very air had solidified. He flipped himself forward, and the demon's jaws snapped closed inches from his face. He smelled its brimstone breath even as he drove his blade up through the roof of its mouth, into the place where its brain ought to be. The felhound tried to close its mouth, but the dagger was wedged between its jaws. The attempt merely drove the spell-wound point deeper into its skull. A gasping wheeze passed through the creature's lips. It keeled over and lay there, tail lashing in a death spasm. Vandel looked over at Illidan, filled with the first faint surge of triumph. What next? he wondered. Illidan stepped into the circle, unhampered by any restraining spells. Illidan reached down and with one clawed hand pulled the felhound's stillpulsing heart from within its chest. He presented it to Vandel. "Eat it," he said. This was not what Vandel expected. Looking at the disgusting mass of foul meat, Vandel considered refusing. But only for a moment. Something in the Betrayer's stance told him that defiance was not an option. He instead took the heart in both hands. The demon flesh was wet and sticky beneath his fingers. What might have been veins dripped greenish acidic ichor. His palms tingled and felt as if they were about to burn. He glanced around and saw even through the shimmering air of the circle that all eyes were upon him. Everyone waited to see what he did. Vandel raised the meat to his lips. He reached out with his tongue. It tingled and burned just as his hands were doing. He suspected that the flesh was saturated with fel magic. He bit into the moist meat and forced himself to chew. The flesh was tough, and he thought it squirmed as it came into contact with his lips. He swallowed and it seemed to expand in his throat as if the demon, even in death, was determined to choke him. He gagged and swallowed again, trying to force it down. It was like having a slug slither down his throat. Illidan indicated the blood pooling around the corpse. "Drink it." Vandel bent down and, with both hands cupped, scooped up some blood. The tingling in his fingers increased. Nausea and dizziness made his head
spin, but he managed to gulp down the foul liquid. It burned like rotgut alcohol from a goblin still. Vandel wondered if it would poison him. His stomach rebelled. He wanted to vomit. To his horror, he felt as if something was kicking within his belly. He imagined the demon flesh coiling in his gut, trying to break free, gnawing its way out. Illidan chanted. Great spheres of greenish light orbited him, burning like shimmering emerald suns. They blazed with heat and magical power, and Vandel felt as if his skin would crack. Bolts of lightning leapt from orb to orb, forming a cage of crackling energy; then at a word from the Betrayer, the bolts speared into Vandel. He screamed in agony as the magic saturated his body. His legs gave way and he collapsed onto the ground, clutching his head, rolling over and over like someone whose clothes were on fire, trying to beat out flames. The pain was intense, and he knew in that moment that the Betrayer was going to kill him. He looked up and saw Illidan standing over him, transformed. He no longer looked remotely like an elf. A dark aura crackled all around him, his form distorted and shimmering. Pure malevolence blazed in his eye sockets, visible even through the cloth covering them. Vandel felt as if he were falling forward into those pools of evil light, tumbling downward into an endless void. Strange emotions filled him. Rage burned in his heart. He reached up toward Illidan, wanting to choke the life from him. His body would not respond. His senses blended. He heard the sizzle of the green light, saw the words that Illidan chanted as perfectly formed runes. Beneath him he felt the pulse of magic flowing through the stones of the Black Temple, and he became aware that out of the void within him, something was rising, something vast and powerful and evil that had come to devour his soul. The world shimmered and vanished.
CHAPTER NINE Four Months Before the Fall
ALL AROUND HIM THE VILLAGE BLAZED. THE LEAVES of the ancient trees shriveled. The gabled log houses crackled and burned. The smell of scorched pine needles filled the air. Sap bubbled within the wood, popping in the heat. He raced through the smoke-filled streets, shouting for his wife and child. In one hand he held his long hunting knife. Demons cavorted amid the ruins. Imps lobbed firebolts into blazing buildings. Massive infernals lumbered through the streets. Masked and armored mo'arg waddled along, spraying anything they saw with magical fire from their weapons. On the roof beam of the central long house, the towering winged figure of a dreadlord loomed. Ahead Vandel saw his home, and for a brief moment, hope filled his heart. Khariel's head thrust through the door. He seemed to be beckoning for his father. It all seemed so real, as if the five miserable years he had spent wandering had evaporated and he had been given a second chance to save his son. And yet he knew that this was not the case. As in a nightmare, he knew what was going to happen next-and it did. The little boy disappeared back into the house, his tiny fist the last thing to go. Vandel sprang over the threshold. Khariel lay there. His eyes were open, staring blankly at the ceiling. On his chest crouched a felhound, gnawing at his flesh. The tiny silver leaf the child had been so proud of still glittered on his throat. The felhound looked up at Vandel. Its stalked sensors waved like the antennae of a huge cockroach. Khariel's blood stained its fangs. Seeing the little boy, only that morning so filled with life and laughter, cold and stark on the ground, sent a lance of agony through Vandel's heart. Sweet, sweet pain. The voice came from somewhere deep within him.
His heart felt as if it were breaking, his head as if it were going to explode. He could not endure this again. But you will, many, many times. And I will feast upon it as I devour your soul. There was an alien presence in his mind. The voice sounded like his own, but it was not. It belonged to something that looked upon all this horror, drank it in, and loved every instant of it. Your horror feeds me. It makes me stronger. The felhound moved toward him, tail lashing, distracting him from the voice. Its short legs carried it at surprising speed. Its mouth yawned to reveal sharp teeth. Vandel sprang to one side, avoiding the strike, wheeled and lashed out with his blade, cutting a bloody green weal along the creature's side. Rage and hate drove the blow. The tear of flesh satisfied both. Yes. Take your vengeance. Feed me. Vandel paused, shocked, and the felhound almost got him. He sprang forward, tripped over the corpse of his wife, and rolled to his feet, back against the wall as the demon bounded closer. It sprang. There was no way to avoid it. Vandel leapt to meet it, chest-to-chest, grasping its armored throat with one hand, driving his blade into the spot where the felhound's heart should be. The creature's sulfurous breath stank in his nostrils. Its claws scrabbled against his chest, digging deep wounds, shredding his leather jerkin. Such delicious agony. The pain almost immobilized him, but he threw his weight forward. The felhound toppled onto its back. He jumped astride its chest, pinning it to the ground. Taking the hilt of his dagger in both hands, he stabbed the demon again and again until its struggles ceased and it lay still. Smoke filled the air. Weak from his wounds, Vandel lay on the ground. His head was next to Khariel's. He reached out with long fingers and closed the little boy's eyes. Tears rolled down his cheeks. He could not move. He did not want to move. He would lie here until the flames turned his home into his pyre. Such nutritious grief. What are you? Vandel thought. The image of him devouring a still-pulsing demon's heart flickered through his mind. You believed you were consuming me, but I am consuming you.
For a moment, Vandel felt the demon's flesh burrowing outward through his own, fusing with it, even as he felt the demon's spirit merge with his. The reality of the burning village wavered. He looked up and saw Illidan at the grounds of the Black Temple, gazing down upon him. He tried to shake himself free from the nightmare, but it returned, filling his mind, driving out all sense of being anywhere but in the ruins of his home, reliving the memory as if it were the present. A massive figure filled the doorway, blocking out the light of the burning village. A demon. Vandel struggled to his feet. It was one thing to burn to death. It was another to let an enemy kill him. He tottered forward, blade arcing down. Effortlessly the intruder caught his wrist and, with a flick of his arm, tossed Vandel out of the house and into the street. He landed rolling and rose. Glancing around, he saw the other demons were all dead. Only corpses lay on the ground. His assailant turned, and Vandel saw that he was different. He appeared to be another night elf, albeit one taller than most, and with demonic features. Glowing tattoos covered his body. The face of a fallen god looked down on Vandel, somehow able to see despite the strip of runecloth shielding where his eyes should be. To his horror, Vandel recognized this figure. Here was a being around whom dark legends clustered. "Illidan," he said. "Betrayer! You are behind this." Vandel clutched his dagger tighter, gathered all his strength, and threw himself forward. It was a perfect thrust, expertly aimed. Never before had he struck a blow so pure. It had all the weight of destiny behind it. He was going to be the one who would end the Betrayer's life. The tip of the blade touched the tattooed skin over Illidan's heart. A steely grip caught Vandel's wrist and halted it there. "I am not the enemy here," Illidan said. "I am going to kill you for what you have done." A bitter laugh emerged from Illidan's lips. "You will not be the first to try. But you are wasting your hatred. The Burning Legion did this." "You serve the Legion." "I serve myself." "You lie. You always lie." "So my enemies would have you believe." Vandel leaned all his weight forward. The blade did not move. Sweat
beaded on his brow from the effort. Illidan gave no sign of feeling any strain. "Because of you, my family is dead." Grief forced the words from Vandel's lips. "Look around you. Do you see any demons? They are dead. I killed them." "Liar." "I arrived too late to save this place, which galls me, for I have fond memories of it. I was happy here once, briefly, ten thousand years ago." Vandel formed his right hand into a fist and attempted to strike Illidan with it. "Liar!" Illidan blocked the blow easily. "I grow tired of your petulance. I thought there was some strength in you. It is not given to just anyone to defeat a demon, armed only with a hunting knife. Are you going to lie there whimpering, or are you going to seek vengeance on those who did this? Join me, and you will have your revenge." Vandel stared directly at the Betrayer's face. The runecloth made it impossible to read his expression. "I will never serve you." "You have only two roads from this place. One of them leads to madness and death; the other, into my shadow." "Never." With casual strength, Illidan backhanded Vandel away. "The end of all things approaches, and I have no time to waste on fools. If you would have your vengeance, seek me out." Darkness flickered across Vandel's field of vision. The updrafts of the burning village drove smoke and sparks into his face. When his sight cleared, Illidan was gone, leaving Vandel alone amid the ruins of his suddenly shattered life. Mockery dripped from the demonic voice in his head. He spoke the truth. You know that now. You knew it as soon as you had time to absorb your grief. You spent all the long years of your wandering trying to find him. Now you have. Too late for it to do you any good. You are mine, and I will have you. The scene shimmered. The village vanished. Vandel stood naked and alone in a tortured landscape. He had no weapons. In front of him stood the felhound he thought he had killed, alive and well. Only one thing was different. It possessed the eyes of a night elf. It took him only a moment to realize that they were identical to his own.
The creature stalked forward. Its movements were confident, those of a hunter that knew its prey couldn't escape, that was going to take its time toying with it. Vandel flexed his hands. They were empty. He glanced around, seeking an edged rock, a boulder, anything he might use as a weapon. There was nothing. Claws scratched the stone in front of him. The felhound had taken the opportunity to close the distance between them. It reared up, huge mouth open wide. Vandel caught the jaws just before they could close on his throat. Their points slashed the flesh of his fingers. He scrambled for a purchase that was not razor-edged, inserted his fingers into the flap of flesh between gum and lip. His right hand was not so fortunate. It snagged on sharp teeth. The pain was agonizing. The tingling of the flesh where demon saliva touched did nothing to ease the torment. It seemed to amplify it. This is not real, he told himself. It is very real, and if you die here in this spell-born dream, you die forever, and I will have your soul and your body. Already I have infected you. Already I can use your skills, your thoughts. Already I am so much more than I once was. He tried to pull the jaws apart, but it took all his strength to keep them from closing. The teeth sawed into his fingers. He knew it was only a matter of time before he lost this struggle. He lowered his head, trying to get it out of reach of the snapping jaws by resting it against the demon hound's short neck. The creature's claws bit into his unprotected chest, ripping strands of flesh free, tearing ribbons from muscle and rib. He knew he had only one chance. He let go of the beast's jaws, got his body underneath it, and raised it on high. It struggled frantically, trying to overbalance him. He held it above his head then brought it down, snapping its spine across his knee. The felhound thrashed, all control of its limbs lost. Vandel brought his foot down on its throat and crushed its windpipe until it stopped moving. Then driven by an instinct he could not understand, he kicked open its squelching stomach, reached into its chest cavity, and pulled out its heart. He held it up, squeezed green blood from the ventricles into his mouth, and then devoured the meat. It tingled as it went down, but this time he felt he was gaining strength from it. The world shimmered and went dark. Nausea filled him. He fell
forward over the body of his enemy. A wrenching, tearing sensation tugged at his bowels. He stood above his own corpse where it sprawled atop the dead felhound. Slowly, impelled by some external force, his spirit rose and drifted out into the blackness. He saw that Outland was but a tiny speck in the infinity of the Great Dark Beyond. A tiny worldlet that floated in a void too vast for any mind to encompass. He became aware that all around him in that void were millions upon millions of worlds, teeming with life and glittering with promise. He focused on one and saw a golden land, bright with sunshine, where a carefree people harvested. Then he saw a portal tear open in the fabric of reality. Through that rent poured the unstoppable forces of the Burning Legion, invincible armies of demons, bent only on destruction and slaughter. All of this had happened many years ago. Long before the Legion had ever reached Azeroth, it had smashed its way across countless worlds, destroying everything that got in its path. Its sole relentless purpose was to kill. There were times and places where the Legion was halted, but it always came back, stronger than before. Sometimes worlds were not destroyed; they were conquered and incorporated into the Legion's structure, producing more soldiers to feed its unceasing war engine. He was not the only parent who had ever lost a child to the Legion. Every moment, somewhere, ten thousand children were killed by its unrelenting savagery. Images of innumerable dead worlds flickered through his mind. He saw gigantic ruins, toppled buildings that had once reached the sky, lakes of glass where proud cities had once stood, endless plains of rubble. He saw the lights of life in the universe winking slowly out until only a few remained. He never doubted the truth of what he was seeing. The Burning Legion left behind a trail of smoldering worlds in its wake. There was madness here on an incomprehensible scale. The Legion existed only to destroy. It would not stop until everything everywhere was dead, and then it would turn on itself with all its savagery until nothing remained. It was a vision of unspeakable horror. The worst of it was that he knew now how strong the Legion was. Nowhere in all the worlds in all existence was any force capable of defeating it. Now you know the truth. Join us. The voice was back. This time there was
a wheedling, pleading note, but he sensed the same hunger lay behind it. Never. Reality shifted. He stood amid the shattered heart of a tower. A carpet of blackened bones crunched beneath his feet. A felhound lurched forward, determined to kill him. He stooped, picked up a broken rib, and stabbed the demon through the heart. It was easier this time and he felt stronger, as if each time he slew the beast, he gained part of its strength. Once again, he opened its chest cavity, drank its blood, and devoured its heart. A titanic vision smashed into his brain. This time he saw not just one universe but a near infinity of them, a complex fractal structure, where new worlds were born each minute from the decisions made a heartbeat before. Everywhere the Burning Legion marched, destroying world after world. Every death narrowed the range of possible worlds, till eventually all the multitude of possibilities narrowed to but a few. In every one of them, the Legion marched triumphant, leaving futures stillborn and presents empty of all life. He saw countless Azeroths, countless Vandels, and countless Khariels, and to every one of them came death. He saw his child die in an infinity of different ways, and in every one of those possible worlds, he was powerless to prevent it. In every world, in every future, the Burning Legion strode, invincible, unstoppable, dooming the universe to eternal darkness in its wake. Behind it all, he saw the looming demonic figures of its leaders: Archimonde-who was believed dead by so many-Kil'jaeden, and above all others, Sargeras the fallen titan, once sworn to guard the universe, now bent on destroying it. On and on the visions roared, tearing through his brain, goading him to the edge of madness and beyond. And every time he saw one, part of him died, and the demon within him fed on his agony and gloated. He covered his eyes with his hands, but it did not stop the horrors from flowing in. He squeezed his eyes tight shut, but still he saw and saw and saw, until he could bear no more. Drowning in horror, he inserted his fingers into his eye sockets, feeling the blood flow and the jelly puncture beneath his nails. He pulled and pulled and pulled, straining against muscle and optic nerve until his eyeballs came free with a hideous sucking sound. At the last moment, before horror overwhelmed him, he realized this was what Illidan once saw. This was what had turned him into what he was. The
Betrayer had walked this path before him. This whole ritual was intended to re-create his experience. Pain seared through Vandel's skull. Darkness. Silence.
* * *
VANDEL WOKE IN AGONY. He had no idea where he was. He could see nothing around him, only flickers of shimmering light. He reached up and touched his ruined face with fumbling fingers and found, as he had feared he would, that his eye sockets were empty. He had indeed torn out his eyes. Fear flashed through him. Was he alive? He could see nothing. Perhaps he had died in the aftermath of the ritual. Perhaps his soul wandered in that cold wasteland where it had drifted during its voyage. Fragments of memory returned to haunt him, shards of the terrible vision eating the demon's heart had given him. He could recall only a tiny portion of what he had seen. He was grateful he could not remember more. The mind was not meant to hold such a tidal wave of horror. He tried to stand upright but felt himself totter and fall. His head banged into the cold stone and sent tiny flickers through the darkness around him. He allowed himself to hope that perhaps it was his sight returning, but he knew it was not. He was blind and he was useless. Mad laughter bubbled from his lips. He had wanted the power to kill demons. Now he could not even see. He had been filled with the desire to oppose the Burning Legion, and now he knew it was invincible. Hopelessness flooded through his mind. Somewhere deep inside him, a demon was feeding. It took nourishment from his bleak mood and gloated over every crumb of wretchedness. He would have wept if he still could. He covered his empty eye sockets in despair.
CHAPTER TEN Four Months Before the Fall
GUARDS IN GLITTERING CHEST PLATES, MOUNTED on armored elekk, watched Maiev approach impassively. Their tabards bore the sign of the naaru. She guessed they had looked upon far more imposing armies than her own. Shattrath was far and away the largest city she had seen in Outland, a rival in size for any of the great metropolises of Azeroth. The walls were so huge and thick, a procession of clefthoof-drawn wagons could have marched along behind the battlements and Maiev would not have known. A huge tower jutted skyward, visible even over the monumental ramparts. Above the city a range of mountains shielded the northern approaches. A massive flying beast passed overhead and descended beyond the fortifications. She needed some of those huge sky-dwelling rays. Mounted on those, her troops could strike swiftly and be gone before their enemies responded. She dismissed the thought. If she could get such mounts, so could her foes. The battle would just move to a new arena. At least on the ground, her troops could hide beneath the eaves of the forest. It was something the night elves were suited to and the draenei and the Broken were learning. Not that these woods were much like home. Like so much else in Outland, they were alien. Huge moths fluttered loathsomely through the trees. Many of them were tainted by fel magic. The more she saw of this world, the more she realized it was saturated with evil mystical energies. Perhaps it had something to do with the presence of the Burning Legion. She was certain of one thing: Outland was the perfect place for Illidan. It had everything he craved. He was at home here in a way a natural elf would never be. She stopped her teeth from grinding when she saw Anyndra looking at her. She smoothed the frown from her brow and gave the signal to advance
upon the gate. If the draenei sentries were daunted by their approach, they gave no sign. They waited until the last moment to drop their lances across the entrance. It was a flimsy barrier. Her nightsaber could have jumped it, but that was not the point. "State your business in the city of Shattrath," said the sentry on the right. He was the senior of the two. "I have come seeking an audience with A'dal." The draenei's face remained impassive. "And your retinue also?" "Yes." She guessed that the fact that so many of her troops were draenei worked in her favor. Or perhaps the guards were really just used to the sight of refugees. Her fighters were ragged from hard riding and hard fighting. Perhaps the sentries were just glad to see more troops enter the city. The guards raised their lances. Pennons fluttered once more in the wind. Maiev rode through the huge stone arch. As soon as she crossed the threshold of the city, she gasped. There was power here, ancient and benevolent. It was woven into the stones, transforming them into more than just a physical barrier against the minions of the Burning Legion. She sensed the pulse of vast energies from within the huge central tower that loomed over the city. "We are in the presence of the Light," Anyndra said. Whatever it was, she sensed it, too. "Let us hope so," Maiev said. "Let us pray it is not some great deceit." Too often evil wore the mask of benevolence. Wickedness cloaked itself in sanctity. It was easy to manipulate the gullible by such means. She considered that possibility long and hard. There had been times recently when she had thought that she would accept aid from Kil'jaeden himself if it meant the end of Illidan. She decided that even if these naaru were less benevolent than they seemed, it did not matter. If they would help her against the Betrayer, she was prepared to make a pact with them.
* * *
THEY RODE THROUGH THE wide streets of Shattrath. Her draenei recruits pointed out the sights to one another and their night elf leaders. All of them had heard a great deal about the city even if they had never been here before.
Maiev supposed that it was to the draenei of Outland what Darnassus was to her own people. It was impressive enough in its own way, although it was a place of stone rather than living wood. Like so many of the draenei refugees it held, the city had a smashed look to it. She felt as if she was looking upon the patched ruins of a once mighty metropolis. The people around her fit their location. Many were ragged and hungry looking. Several approached her with hands outstretched. A few were children. She had nothing to give such beggars even if she wanted to. It was hard enough to keep her own troops fed and clothed, and every coin was needed to fund their war. There were people from all over Outland. Broken huddled in lean-tos by the side of the road. There were orcs here, which surprised her. She was not sure why. She was so used to fighting them, her hand itched to draw her blade. That urge was as nothing to the anger she felt when she saw a blood elf staring at her. She was not the only one who noticed. "Blood elves," Anyndra said with a scowl. She felt the same loathing of these twisted elves as Maiev did. They had lost their fount of arcane magic when Arthas defiled the Sunwell and used its energies to reanimate the lich Kel'Thuzad. Now they craved arcane power with an unappeasable lust. The blood elf's lips bent into an arrogant sneer, but he could not meet their gazes just the same. "We should pity them," Sarius said. He walked along beside them in his night elf form. "Their lives are twisted by their unnatural craving for magical power." "I do not think I could live if I became what they are," Anyndra said. Sarius's smile was complex. "They were our kin once. Perhaps they could be again. They might be redeemed." Maiev stared at him. She should have expected as much. Sarius was a druid. They had strange ideas. "I do not think they want to be redeemed," Anyndra said. "I think they enjoy being what they are." "How would you know?" Sarius asked. "Have you talked to any of them?" "No. I was too busy trying to stop them from killing me," said Anyndra. Her tone was soft, and she smiled at the druid. "As you should remember." "I certainly healed the wounds." Sarius was smiling as well. There was a definite fondness between the pair. As long as it did not interfere with the
performance of their duties, Maiev did not mind. As she rode she noticed that more than one set of sin'dorei eyes tracked them. There was no love in those gazes. She wondered if the blood elves were spies for Kael'thas and, through him, for Illidan.
* * *
THE SIGN OF THE Crystal Goblet hung over the street. The sound of music and revelry came from within. Maiev led her troops to the courtyard, and Broken stable hands rushed out to greet them. They seemed confident enough with the elekk, but none of them wanted anything to do with the nightsabers. A massive Broken emerged from the building. His eyes went wide when he saw the number of riders. She could almost see him counting the profits. "Blessings of the Light be upon you," he said. His horned head bowed. The long tendrils around his mouth drooped. He placed his hands together, fingers interlocked. "Welcome to the Crystal Goblet. You will find all to your satisfaction here." "I hope so," Maiev said. "Arechron spoke very highly of Alexius and his hospitality." The Broken's smile widened. "You have spoken to my cousin. You are thrice welcome. You will be wanting accommodations for your retinue?" "Only for myself, my officers, and a dozen or so bodyguards. The rest of my force will be encamped beyond the city walls." Alexius gave a small grimace of disappointment, then turned and bellowed instructions in Draenei. A small army of servants scurried off to prepare the best rooms in the house. "I would be honored if you would join me in my private rooms," he said. "I am sure there is much we must speak of." Maiev thought she detected a note of urgency in his voice. Perhaps Arechron had already made contact. Messengers flew between Telaar and Shattrath on a regular basis. "Indeed, I am grateful for your hospitality."
* * *
ALEXIUS'S CHAMBERS WERE LUXURIOUS, furnished with rugs and mirrors and racks and racks of wine bottles. He carefully selected one, blew dust off it,
and showed it to Maiev, as if it meant something. She had no idea about the differences between draenei vintages, and she cared even less. "This was a very fine year," Alexius said. "A century before our world was broken, this bottle was laid down. When you taste this, you will be getting a taste of the old Draenor." She forced herself to smile as if she was interested and waited for him to uncork the bottle and pour. He sat there for long moments with the full glass under his lips, sniffing it with his eyes shut and a look of profound satisfaction on his face. "The scent always makes me think of my childhood." "You drank wine as a child?" "Sometimes with meals. But mostly it is just the scent. It makes me think of my father and mother sitting down to break bread with their kin." "This was before your world was shattered?" He nodded and his glowing eyes snapped open. "Yes. I am older than I look," he said, smiling to show that he knew how old he really looked. "It must have been a terrible time," Maiev said. She had found that the more she reminded the draenei and the Broken of their suffering, the more likely they were to aid her against those they blamed for it. "A world shattered?" His tone told her that he thought her words a gross understatement. "Terrible hardly begins to describe it. We thought the world was ending. The sky burned. The continents ripped apart. Lava flowed. Wild magic danced from mountain peak to mountain peak. Sometimes the tips of mountains rose into the air and floated away. Sometimes they crashed down and killed thousands." "I have seen such things in Nagrand." "That is like comparing a pebble to a boulder, I am afraid." "You have been to Nagrand?" He nodded. "Business sometimes takes me to Telaar. And family responsibilities." His smile widened and he placed his hands, palms up, on the table. "But you have not come here to listen to the meanderings of an old innkeeper. Arechron's letters have told me something about your quest. You seek the undoing of this new lord of Outland, this Illidan." He kept his voice low, as if even on his own property, he feared being overheard. If he thought it wise, Maiev decided that it was worth doing the same. "Yes."
"You have a very small army for such a large undertaking." "Are you an expert in such things?" "I was not always a fat old innkeeper. I have fought. But I have never set myself against such a mighty enemy as you have." "I have bested him before." "Yet he is free now and he has grown mighty. His agents lurk everywhere, in secret. There are always those who will tell tales for gold. I would be careful of to whom I spoke if I were you, and even more careful what I spoke of." "I will bear that in mind. I was told there are those here who might aid me. The naaru, for example." "They might, although I fear they have worries of their own." "Still, it would not hurt to ask." "That is so. She who does not ask, does not get, as they say." The Broken did not sound particularly hopeful about the success of her mission, but perhaps that was just his manner. "The Born from Light might help one they deem worthy." "Born from Light?" "The Sha'tar. That is what their name means. They are the naaru who were drawn to the ruins of Shattrath when they sensed the Aldor priests performing rites inside the rubble of one of their temples." "Arechron mentioned the Aldor." "As well he might. They are the servants of the naaru and of the Light. They are recruiting all they can find to oppose the Burning Legion. They would be grateful for any aid you could give them." "I have no doubt that theirs is a worthy goal, but I feel I can best serve the Light by overcoming Illidan. He is the greatest champion the Burning Legion has in Outland." "Is it not strange, then, that he seems to be at war with them?" "It may be a deception. Or it may be a temporary disagreement. He has fallen out with his demonic overlords before, only to worm his way back into their favor." "You know a great deal about it." "I was his jailor for ten thousand years." "He must hate you." "And fear me, too, I hope."
"I do not doubt it," Alexius said. "Can you arrange for me to see the naaru?" "You can walk in and talk with them in the Terrace of Light. They will know you are here by now, and they will sense the power within you and give you a hearing." "Is it that simple?" "For you it will be, of that I have no doubt. Your war against the new lord of Outland has not gone unremarked." "You said he has agents here. Would they be blood elves?" "Perhaps, but I would not be too quick to rush to judgment if I were you. The sin'dorei here are sworn to protect the city. The Scryers look most unfavorably on those who aid your Betrayer. They betrayed him themselves." "Did they?" "They were sent by Prince Kael'thas to lay waste to our city. A mighty force they were, the best and brightest of Kael'thas's army, mighty magi and scholars. The Aldor braced themselves for defense, but the blood elves laid down their arms and asked for an audience with the naaru. It seems their leader, Voren'thal, had a vision. Only by serving the naaru would his people survive." "It might well have been a trick." "So many thought, but the naaru spoke with this Voren'thal and accepted his fealty. He and his people have served the city ever since." "A deception." "The naaru can see deep into the minds of those with whom they converse, and they are not easily deceived." "If any could do so, it would no doubt be Kael'thas. He is wily." "You speak with some bitterness." "I, too, once regarded him as an ally." "That is troubling. Nonetheless, the blood elves of the Scryer's Tier would be the next faction I would suggest you seek aid from." Maiev felt her face redden. "I would rather seek aid from fel orcs." The Broken's hand went to his mouth, and he stroked his drooping tendrils. "The enemy of my enemy ..." "You are not the first to suggest such a thing to me. But an alliance with the sin'dorei is a step too far." "That is a pity, for the Scryers are mighty sorcerers ..."
Maiev's fists clenched. The Broken realized his mistake. "I shall speak no more on the subject." "Perhaps that would be wise." Maiev felt a brief sting of regret. She had nothing to gain by alienating the innkeeper. "I appreciate the aid you have given me. I am a stranger here, and a friendly guide is without price." "We are all strangers in this world, Maiev Shadowsong. We must help one another." "Is there anyone else who might help me?" "There is Khadgar the archmage, a trusted ally of the naaru. I believe he is from your homeworld." "Tell me of him." "Tales swirl around this one, and it is difficult to get at the truth. He is a human. A few of them have found their way to Shattrath. Some say he is a hero who sacrificed himself to close the Dark Portal between Azeroth and Draenor. Others claim he was an apprentice of Medivh, the Guardian who was possessed by Sargeras." "That hardly seems like a recommendation to trust him." "The Sha'tar do." "I fear I cannot." "Then it is probably just as well that he is no longer in the city. The naaru have dispatched him to the Netherstorm-or so I have heard. To investigate some strange appearances there." "You are uncommonly well informed, Alexius." "I am an innkeeper. We hear things, particularly when we keep our ears to the ground." "I am glad that you have done so. Of course, I would be displeased to discover that you had been talking about my business with anyone else." Alexius looked wounded. "You were sent here by my cousin. It would be a betrayal of all the laws of kinship and hospitality for me to do so." "Of course. I just wanted to make sure we understood each other." "Now you sound like my cousin. I can see why he liked you."
* * *
SO THIS IS THE TERRACE OF LIGHT, Maiev thought. It was impressive in its odd way. The air shimmered. Crystalline notes sounded. Huge glowing blue
crystals descended from the roof of the vast circular chamber. The scent of incense twitched her nostrils. At the center, over a massive stone dais, hovered a glowing entity of enormous power. The naaru. Its shape shifted constantly from one geometric form to another, but it returned most often to an outline that resembled that of a star. Hundreds of petitioners came and went, along with priestly servants who no doubt belonged to the Aldor. Robed blood elves, wearing the tabard of the Scryers, stared at her. They did not look hostile, but they did not look friendly, either. They seemed to be wondering what she was going to do. She made her way through the crowd, studying her surroundings. Above her the giant domed roof of the terrace echoed back the sounds of prayers and petitions. It was some time before she confronted the naaru. She was grateful. It gave her a chance to become accustomed to its awesome presence. A'dal shimmered like a chained sun. Unleashed, the naaru's power might destroy cities or level mountains. The full blast of its attention focused on her when she stepped forward to greet it. It was all she could do to prevent herself from kneeling. She kept her head high and glanced straight into its light. Maiev felt as if the naaru was able to read her the way she might read an unfurled scroll. There was something about this being that made her feel like little more than a child. "Greetings, Warden Shadowsong," A'dal said. The naaru radiated serenity. Its calm, pleasant voice seemed to come from everywhere and nowhere at once. Perhaps it was speaking inside her mind. "I am A'dal." "Elune shines on the moment of our meeting," Maiev said. A'dal said, "How can I aid you?" "You know who I am?" "Yes." "You know what I do?" "Yes." "I have come to Outland in search of Illidan. I mean to return him to his place of incarceration." "An ambitious goal. Illidan styles himself the lord of Outland now. He has the power to make good on that claim. Who are you to oppose him?" "One who held him bound for ten times a thousand years." "A blink in the eye of eternity."
Maiev's smile was rueful. "It seemed long enough to me." "As you mortals measure time, it was, no doubt." "But not as the naaru do?" "We see these things differently from you. We have no bodies to age. We are beings of Light." "Then you know Illidan must be opposed." "It is a task you seem admirably suited to." "It is the work of my life." "I can see that, and it makes me regret all the more that we have no aid to give you at this time." "What?" The word burst from her lips before she could stop it. "Alas, we, too, have a mission in this place. We oppose the Burning Legion. This is a task that takes all our resources." "But Illidan serves the Legion. Opposing him can only aid you." "At this moment Illidan opposes the Legion. He is its enemy. We take advantage of this to gather our strength." "At this moment he opposes the demons. While it suits him. When it no longer does so, he will crawl back to his masters on his belly, as he always has." "Your hatred blinds you." "It is not hatred. I seek justice for those he has killed, for those he has betrayed, for those he will murder. You cannot tell me that you believe that Illidan is any better than the Burning Legion." "You have no concept of the true nature of the Burning Legion, Warden Shadowsong." "And you do?" "We have opposed it for a thousand times your lifetime. We shall oppose it until the end of all that is." "I need more than fine words if I am to bring Illidan to justice." "Unfortunately, words are all I have for you now. You must find your own path. You are not without allies here, even if you cannot see that. You can find more if you make the attempt. The chief magister of the Scryers waits to speak with you." "A blood elf?" "One of your people." "The blood elves are not my people. They turned their back on my people
long ago. We have nothing in common." "Save perhaps an enemy." "I will have nothing to do with those heretics." "That would be your choice." Maiev reined in her fury. She bowed and turned on her heel without waiting for A'dal to terminate the audience. She heard gasps from nearby blood elves, which gave her some satisfaction. A tall blood elf in the tabard of a Scryer moved toward her. He was most likely the one A'dal had mentioned. She swept by him without giving him the opportunity to speak. It seemed that she still had some principles. There were those with whom she would not consider a pact. Even to bring down the Betrayer.
CHAPTER ELEVEN Four Months Before the Fall
VANDEL MOANED AND TRIED TO SIT UP. HIS HEAD spun. He stretched out his hands, trying to maintain his balance, but that just made things worse. He crashed back to the hard floor, smacking his head. His forehead felt wet beneath his questing fingers. He had cut himself again. Blood matted his hair from his previous attempts at rising. He dry heaved. The demon meat in his stomach was fighting its way free. The thought sickened him, and yet it also made his mouth water. All around, he could hear screams and groans and babbling. Sometimes he recognized the voices of his fellow aspirants. Sometimes, he thought it was all his imagination, that he was trapped in a private hell of his own making. The air stank of rotting flesh, gangrene, pus, and excrement. At regular intervals, the hooves of Broken servants clattered on the stone floor as they cleaned the chambers and washed the sick. Twice they had swabbed him with sponges, and he had tried to force them away. All he wanted was to be left alone. Glowworms of color writhed across his field of vision. At first they had given him hope that he might be starting to see again, but now he thought his mind was playing tricks on him, pretending to see things whenever he heard others near. "Broken moon, demon moon, blood moon!" He knew that shouting voice from somewhere, but he was not sure from where. "Demons approach. A demon approaches." Leathery wings snapped. Displaced air swirled around his face. "On your feet," Illidan's voice said. "You have rested long enough." It was the first time Vandel had heard the Betrayer's voice since the ritual. He felt his lips tighten into a sneer. "What is the point? I cannot see."
"I thought the same thing once. But now I can see to the end of the universe. It is closer than most think." Remembering the march of the Burning Legion through countless devastated worlds, Vandel understood the bitter humor of the Betrayer's words. "I know." "Then you also know what we fight. And why." There was an arrogant certainty in Illidan's tone that Vandel resented. There was a challenge, too. The demonic thing within him stirred, responding to Illidan's presence with something like hunger. It lent Vandel strength and goaded him to speak. "How can you fight against what I saw? It is impossible." Impossible, impossible, impossible, whispered the voice in the back of his head. It still sounded like his own, only clotted with hatred. The felhound had grafted itself to his soul, and its spirit seemed able to use his mind and his memories now. "Be quiet," Vandel told it. He heard the creak of wings as Illidan moved. The Betrayer ignored his words as if he sensed to whom Vandel was speaking. "We must fight. Countless worlds have fallen to the Legion, and ours will be next unless we stop it." Fragments of apocalyptic visions swirled through Vandel's mind. He saw worlds burning and nations dying, and through it all he saw the Legion marching, its victory as inevitable as death. The thing at the back of his mind snickered. "Be quiet," he repeated, but it ignored him. "Stand up," Illidan commanded, and there was no disobeying that voice. Even the thing in Vandel's mind quailed. He lurched to his feet and stood there, swaying. His stomach heaved. The world spun once more. A clawed hand dug into his shoulder and held him upright. Writhing worms of light shimmered beside him, slithering away from the point of contact. "I cannot see," Vandel said. "You can see everything." Vandel's head spun faster. Lights flickered all around him. He lashed out with his hand, seeking to strike at the lights. They moved away. Rage surged within him. The worms of light were everywhere, covering everything. They filled the space surrounding him. He heard a whimpering sound from a mass of sickly green, knew it was a feverish elf. He twisted to where Illidan stood, and he saw a blaze of light. If he looked
closely, it appeared to be a winged shape. "You tricked me, Betrayer. You told me you would give me the power to fight demons, to avenge my family." His anger was a bonfire as bright as Illidan's aura. It gave him strength. Hatred tasted like bile in his mouth. He wanted to smash his fists into Illidan's face and beat him till the bones broke. He wanted to drink his blood and eat his heart and be filled with the power that burned before him. The dizziness was gone now. He had no trouble moving. He wished he had his blades. "I have given you all that and more." The blaze of Illidan's aura moved. Vandel turned his head, tracking it, and he realized that he was also tracking the source of the voice. This did not make him less angry. Frustration built up in him. He wanted to rend and tear. He bit his lip until blood flowed. He was going to kill the Betrayer. He was going to supplant him. He sprang forward. He heard a rustling sound. His fist smashed into something leathery but lined with bone. A wing. Illidan's wing. A moment later it buffeted him from his feet. He hit the ground and rolled toward another swirling mass of light. He felt the contact of flesh when he reached it, heard a feverish voice groan. No doubt about it-in some way, he was perceiving where things were. He sniffed the air, smelled soiled bandages, unwashed flesh, and beneath that the tainted odor of demon, repulsing him and arousing his hunger at the same time. He wanted to feast upon it. He dived forward, jaws clamping on the sick elf's arm. A powerful hand caught him by the neck and lifted him like an elf might lift a nightsaber cub. Illidan said, "Enough. You must learn to control that which lies within you, or it will control you." Rage goaded Vandel to aim an elbow backward. Once again he felt himself cast across the room. Air rushed by. He sensed the cold presence of the wall before he hit it, and he let himself go limp. The impact hurt but not as much as it ought to. He rolled once again to his feet. The Betrayer was keeping him from his prey. Vandel coiled his muscles to leap. Illidan's aura became sharper, its greenish-yellow light blazing. Motes of it swirled in the air around him, shifting into new patterns as the Betrayer moved his fingers and arms. Vandel realized he was seeing fel magic being bound to Illidan's will as he drew upon its power. A moment later a bolt of it
leapt from Illidan's finger and impacted on Vandel's chest. Strength drained from his body like wine from an upended goblet. The dizziness returned, multiplied a thousandfold. He crashed into the stone at Illidan's hooves, rage departing in proportion to his strength. He felt like himself once more, but he understood now what he was seeing, what had happened to him. "The demon I devoured. It is still within me, is it not?" "Yes," said Illidan, "and it wants to be free." "How can I control it?" "You take the first step along that road today. Walk with me." "Why?" "Why what?" "Why are you here? Why are you helping me?" "Because you know who the true enemy is, and you have the potential to be a great hunter of demons. I saw that the day your village burned. I see it now. I will have need of fighters like you before the end." Still dizzy and weak, Vandel forced himself to his feet. His true foes were the innumerable forces of the Burning Legion, which even now prepared to strike at his homeworld. He stood for a moment, calming his mind, listening for any internal voice that was not his own. He heard nothing, but he knew that didn't mean anything. He did not doubt that the demon was still in there, waiting for the opportunity to break free once more. He was aware now of the ebb and flow of energies all around. The lights were auras of living things, some bright, some filled with energy. The brightest of all came from the being who stood beside him. "Is this how you see the world?" Vandel asked. "It is one way. Your mind becomes accustomed to it eventually. It maps its new way of seeing onto its old way of understanding reality. There will come a time when you will be able to perceive the world as once you did. It is a much narrower way of seeing, but our minds crave familiarity." "You are saying you can shift from seeing the world like this to seeing it as if you had eyes?" "Indeed, and many gradations between." He tried to imagine Illidan as he had previously seen him, and slowly a very rough image of the Betrayer stood before him, like a child's illustration
drawn in mud. Its mud mouth moved as Illidan spoke. "In a way it is like working magic. You get a feel for the flows of power. You get a sense of the souls of the living and the unliving." They walked toward a doorway. Vandel sensed its lack of density in the air and the solid matter around it. He was not sure how. He also sensed there were living things beyond it. There was power in them, too. They were waiting for something. Illidan pushed him forward. He collided with something at about waist height. It felt like the edge of a table. "Lie down on it." "Why?" Vandel asked. "You are about to receive your first tattoos." Vandel fumbled at the table with his hands, feeling the rough texture of the wood. It came to him then how much he had taken his sense of touch for granted, and how inaccurate it used to be. Now he could feel every grain of the wood, every knot, every splinter. He felt areas that were slightly rougher, as if the carpenter had been sloppy with his planing. It seemed like his various senses were now many times magnified. He lay down on the board. Leather straps snapped into place around him. Momentary panic filled him as he was restrained. It increased as power blossomed in one of the nearby figures. "You will learn to do these for yourself one day, but for now, you must accept them from others. Be still," said Illidan. "This will hurt." The inker leaned forward, and something so hot it was cold, or perhaps so cold it was hot, touched Vandel's flesh. He fought down the urge to scream. When the needle withdrew, he felt as if a dagger were being pulled from a wound and twisted. No. No. No. The voice in his head gibbered in panic. The fear communicated itself to him. This was a trap. Evil magic was being worked here. The needle stabbed in once more. Pain blasted his body, worse than anything he had felt since he had pulled out his own eyes. He thrashed around, trying to free himself. The restraining bands drew tight. Hard hands pushed down on him. The needle stabbed again and again, and every touch of its point sent blazing agony searing through him. With every stitch, strength leached out of him. The voice in his head grew weaker and weaker.
He was dying. This magic was going to kill him. He snarled threats and whimpered pleas, but the pain went on and on and on, until he could struggle no more and could only lie there while the inker went about his work. Eventually the straps were undone. He could barely rise from the table. His anger and his fear had subsided. For the first time in days, he truly felt like himself. He could barely see the glow of auras around him. His enhanced senses had returned to normal levels. It was as if he had been drugged and the potency had worn off. "I am glad that is over," Vandel said. "The worst is just beginning," Illidan replied.
* * *
THE CELL WALLS CLOSED in all around Vandel. Down below in the courtyards, he could hear fighting and practicing. Were they like him, he wondered, a new intake of fools who had been seduced by Illidan's promises of power? It was a relief to be away from the sick house, to have his own chamber. He had been brought here immediately after gaining his first tattoos. It had taken him the whole day to recover from that. It was pleasant not to be surrounded by the auras of living things. The quiet was relaxing. He lay on his bed and touched his empty sockets. His eyes were gone forever. In the absence of living things, it was easy to convince himself that he had hallucinated the whole experience of seeing auras. Perhaps it was a dream. The feel of rough sheets beneath his fingers told him that it was not. He was blind. He had blinded himself so he wouldn't see the terrible truth, that the whole universe was doomed, like his wife and child had been. There was nothing he or anyone else could do to stop the Burning Legion. Anyone who thought otherwise was as deluded as the Betrayer. Such delusions were easy to have, sitting in a fortress like the Black Temple, surrounded by troops. The truth was that no one was safe. No place was safe. When the Burning Legion exerted its strength, the Black Temple would fall like a child's sand castle kicked by a giant. All those fighters practicing arms outside would die when the dreadlords came to claim the
Legion's possession. Great Sargeras, the titan who would topple the universe, would ultimately triumph. He had been the first to see the truth. Vandel stopped. Where had that come from? He had seen the fallen titan in his vision. That must be it. Some part of Illidan's original vision had been transferred to him during the ritual. He knew that. But sometimes it felt as if Vandel wasn't in control of his thoughts. The tattoos bound the demon within him. It could not escape now. He traced the ink with his fingers, feeling the lines of power that scarred his body. His hand touched something else, something cold and hard. At first he thought it was a piece of metal, but then he realized that it was set in his skin. He fumbled at his face and found it was there, too. He paused, chilled by the realization that his flesh had been transformed. He felt one hand with the other, and it slowly dawned on him what had happened. Every place on his skin that had been touched by demon blood had been altered. He had acquired scales of some sort. This might just be the start of the process. He was certain that while he lay in the hospital, his skin had been normal. Perhaps this was only the first stage of the transformation. Perhaps he was turning into a demon. It seemed entirely possible. After all, he had no idea what had really been done to him. Illidan might well be lying. He certainly would if it suited his purposes. The change had begun after the demon had been chained by the mystical tattoos. It must have. He had not been changed when he got up this morning. He was certain of that. Perhaps since the demon was unable to affect his mind, it was starting to affect his body. He rubbed his fingers against his palms. He felt the fingertips of his left hand with those of his right. The nails were long and sharp and dense, like the claws of a hunting cat. His gums hurt, and he fumbled at his mouth. Yes. His canines jutted out, large and sharp. He had acquired fangs. Black depression settled on him. He had sought the power to fight demons. Instead he was being transformed into one. He was turning into the thing he hated. How long would it be before he was out there, killing other elves' children? He had felt the unnatural rage the demon had given him. He understood its strength. Who was he to try to contain that? Perhaps the best thing he could do was to kill himself before that happened. He sat up and reached out to the small table beside his bed. His
rune-woven knife lay there, along with the charm he had made for Khariel. He picked that up and thought about his dead son. How would Khariel feel if he saw his father now? He would see only a monster, a creature on its way to becoming the thing that had murdered him. He told himself he was not thinking clearly, that something was affecting his mind. Perhaps it was the aftereffects from the tattoo sorcery. No. You are seeing clearly, for the first time in a long while. You are seeing yourself as you are. A hollow thing that has allowed itself to be changed into that which it hates, in search of a vengeance impossible to get. Illidan is mad. You are mad. The truth of that thought was incontestable. He was insane, and had been for a very long time. He had always suspected it, and now all his suspicions were confirmed. Hatred filled him, turned this time on himself. He took the knife, tested its blade on his thumb. It was still magically sharp. He took the point and inserted it under the edge of one of the scales. He pulled it free. It hurt, but the pain lent him energy. If he could cut out all the scales, he could stop the transformation, like a surgeon cutting out a patch of gangrene. The thought drove him to cut again and again until he was covered in his own blood and patches of his skin lay on the floor. He felt weak and dizzy. It occurred to him that he was losing blood and that he might die here in this cell. Something in his head laughed at that, and it came to him that the demon was not as trapped as he had believed, and certainly not as weak. It had just turned to a new form of attack, twisting his thoughts, toying with his emotions. It had tapped into all of his dark thoughts and self-hatred. It had access to all of his feelings and all of his shame. In a way, it was him. He pulled himself upright, and the demon went silent as if it had realized its mistake. He reeled toward the door. Blood stuck to his bare feet and made them sticky. He prayed that the cell door was not locked as he threw his strength against it. The door opened and he fumbled his way out into the corridor, staggering from side to side so that he grazed the walls. He heard someone shout, "Another one. Get Akama!" Then he passed out.
* * *
VANDEL WOKE TO THE awareness of power all around him. It was soothing. The areas he had cut felt numb. They tingled, but the sensation was almost pleasant. Someone stood over him. He smelled like a Broken. His aura blazed with magic. "You are Akama?" Vandel's voice was weak and his throat felt parched. "Yes. You are Vandel." It was not a question. "You clearly impressed Lord Illidan. He asked me to look after you personally." "You are a healer?" "I am. I do what I can to help the sick and the wounded." "Which am I?" "A bit of both, I would say, and something else as well. There is a taint in you that I mislike." "Whatever it is, I thank you for your help." "You are welcome, and you are also lucky the guards found you in time. You are the fifth of the new recruits to have attempted suicide in the past two days. You are the only one who has lived." "I did not attempt suicide." "What else would you call it? You hacked at your own flesh until you almost bled to death. You would have, if you had hit an artery. What has been done to you?" There was a note below the natural curiosity in Akama's voice that made Vandel wary. "You do not know?" "I know only that Lord Illidan takes many of your people into that courtyard, and only a few come out, and those altered almost beyond recognition. If he is trying to create an army, he has chosen a funny way of doing so. Killing recruits rarely leads to a large force." "If you do not know what is going on, it would perhaps be better not to ask. Lord Illidan has his reasons, and if he wants you to know them, he will share them with you." Akama made a tut-tutting sound. "As you say. There is a good deal that goes on here in the temple that it is best not to be curious about." As if to echo this, a mighty bellow sounded from deep belowground. The stones seemed to vibrate in time to the roaring. "Another monster bound in the temple's defense," said Akama.
Vandel ignored the Broken. A jolt of memory passed through him. Four others had killed themselves. He recalled Illidan's words. It was possible that fewer than one in five of the recruits was going to survive the transformation. Vandel had thought the Betrayer had been talking only about the ritual, but it occurred to him now that he had also meant its aftermath. He felt a sudden certainty that things were just beginning and that the worst still lay ahead.
CHAPTER TWELVE Four Months Before the Fall
ILLIDAN STRODE INTO THE COUNCIL CHAMBER. Akama followed at his heels like a faithful dog. The Broken seemed to be doing everything possible to look like a loyal servant. Perhaps he suspected that Veras Darkshadow's agents were watching him, and had been ever since his mysterious disappearances from the Black Temple had become numerous enough to attract Veras's attention. It was possible that Darkshadow simply wanted to discredit a rival, but his claims had aroused Illidan's curiosity. All eyes turned to look at him. There was fear in every gaze. The Burning Legion had struck hard. Prince Kael'thas had been missing for weeks, ever since he had set out in command of an expeditionary force to the Netherstorm. Everyone present knew that the war was not going well, and they expected to feel Illidan's wrath because of it. It did not matter. All was going according to plan as long as his demon hunters were coming along. Illidan stalked over to the great map table. Massive gems carved to represent demonic transporters marred a dozen locations. They glittered like plague boils on the face of the world. They dotted Nagrand and Hellfire Peninsula, the Netherstorm and the Blade's Edge Mountains. It seemed that almost every province of Outland held at least one, sometimes more. "Each of these marks a new forge camp, Lord Illidan," said Gathios the Shatterer, a little too quickly. He had risen from his carved throne as soon as Illidan entered, and he stood there as if called to attention by a commanding officer. "The Burning Legion has set up bases there and fortified them. I have been putting together contingency plans to assault them and throw the demons back." "Have you, Gathios?" Illidan kept his voice deceptively mild. "And how exactly do you intend to do that? Each of those forge camps contains a
transporter. They can be reinforced by demons at a moment's notice." "Lord Illidan, we closed Magtheridon's portals with your aid. Surely we can close these." Illidan studied the map. "Every time we close a portal, another appears. Kil'jaeden can draw upon near-infinite forces. He toys with us." Lady Malande gave a nervous giggle. This was obviously not what she had expected Illidan to say. "You will lead us to victory, Lord. I have every faith in you. These new soldiers you have been forging-if they are all as strong as Varedis and Netharel and Alandien-will surely be able to slaughter the demons." Illidan stared at her. She seemed particularly well informed about the demon hunters. Had she been spying on them? Of course she had. All of his council had. They were curious about anything that shifted the balance of power within the Black Temple. It might well affect their own stations. How much had Malande uncovered? The demon hunters represented the most important part of his plan to strike back at the Burning Legion. Secrecy was critical. He could not take any chances of the nathrezim finding out what he was up to until he was ready to launch his attack. He had told no one of his ultimate goal-but he might have let something slip, left some clue from which a mind as keen and suspicious as Malande's would be able to deduce his intentions. Illidan wished that Lady Vashj were here. She was at least straightforward, easy to understand, and utterly loyal. Alas, she was in Zangarmarsh, supervising the draining of the marshland as part of the first stage of the plan to take control of all the waters of Outland and, through them, all its people. Thirst and drought were mighty weapons. Illidan gazed at Veras Darkshadow. "Have your agents found out anything concerning Kael'thas's fate?" Veras shook his head. "They found the last camp of his army, but then nothing." "Nothing?" "Nothing significant, Lord. Traces of campfires, refuse, little more." "No sign of a struggle?" "None, Lord. It is as if the prince simply opened a portal and vanished. It seems he does not want to be found." Veras was implying that Kael'thas was planning some treachery. Illidan
did not discount the possibility. Kil'jaeden had shown particular interest in the blood elf prince the day the Black Temple had fallen. On consideration, Illidan had decided that the Deceiver had been trying to sow seeds of dissension between him and his allies. Perhaps the demon lord had done more than that, but now was not the time to say so. If Kael'thas had turned, he might well have left spies behind. Illidan would not make them wary. "Let us not jump to any conclusions, Veras. Just find Kael'thas." "As you wish, Lord," said Veras. "So shall it be." He looked as if he wanted to speak more in private. His eyes flashed to Akama. Illidan said, "All of you are dismissed. Except you, Darkshadow. I want to have words with you concerning the whereabouts of Maiev Shadowsong." The other council members filed out. Akama paused in the doorway as if he was about to say something, thought the better of it, and departed.
* * *
THE ELEVATOR CARRIED MAIEV and Anyndra up the side of Aldor Rise. It was a low, flat platform, and nothing visible supported it as it lifted itself into the sky. Powerful magic was at work here. Maiev's nightsaber growled and stayed away from the edge. The big cat had an excellent sense of balance, but it was taking no chances of a fall from this height. Maiev had a tremendous view of the rooftops of the city and the great tower that housed the Terrace of Light. It was so tall, it threatened to touch the sky. Inside it, she felt the power of the naaru. It galled her that they had not agreed to help. With their aid, she would have had a much better chance of bringing Illidan to justice. Sarius soared along beside the elevator, wearing the form of a storm crow. Maiev recognized him by his distinctive plumage. He was there to watch and observe. She did not expect these Aldor to prove treacherous, but she never ruled out the possibility with anyone. Traitors could be found in the most surprising places. Anyndra said, "They say that sometimes the Broken ride this elevator just so they can throw themselves off at the top. You would think the sentries would prevent that." "Maybe they think they are performing an act of mercy," said Maiev.
She was wondering whether she should have brought more guards. They would be outnumbered atop Aldor Rise, but at least their presence would have spoken of Maiev's importance. In the end, she had decided that it would be better to appear as a petitioner. The platform glided to a stop. She took one last glance down at the city and thought about those sad Broken making the long drop to the stones below. Above them, two stone islets hovered in the sky. They had been curved after the fashion of draenei architecture, and lights glowed in their sides to leave the viewer in no doubt as to their magical provenance. It was clear that visitors were meant to be overawed by this display of magic. Great crystals studded the sides of the buildings atop the rise. At night their glow could be seen in the sky above the city, a reminder to all of the purity of the Aldor and the Light they served. Maiev sniffed at the thought. Aldor guards, clad in heavy armor and wearing the purple tabard of their faction, greeted her. They were not hostile, but they made it very clear that she was under observation. She stated her business, and they led her to the so-called Shrine of Unending Light. A tall, beautiful female draenei, garbed in robes of blue and white moved to greet her. Maiev inclined her head to accept her benediction. "Blessings of the Light upon you, Warden Shadowsong," said the draenei. "I am Ishanah, high priestess of the Aldor. I have been told that you would have words with me." Maiev detected a subtle note of hostility in the high priestess's tone. "I have come seeking the aid of those who follow the Light." "I have been told that a number of those already follow you." "I meant the Aldor." "You seek to slay the one called the Betrayer?" "Or imprison him once more." "Why?" Maiev's jaw fell open. "Because he is evil." "We do not have such strength that we can afford to throw it away assaulting the Black Temple. It is all we can do to hold our ground. And we serve other functions." Maiev let her eyes dwell on Ishanah's rich robes, then let them slide to their beautiful surroundings. "I can see that."
"We do not all have to enter the darkness to fight against it." "Sometimes, defeating evil means getting your hands dirty." "And sometimes, getting your hands dirty turns you to evil." Ishanah's smile seemed mocking. "In order to work with the Light, you must be pure of heart." "And you think I am not?" Maiev's anger simmered in her voice. "I think you do what you believe is right." Maiev frowned at that hairsplitting distinction. "What I do is right." "No doubt. No doubt." "You will not aid me?" "At this moment, I cannot." "Cannot or will not?" "There are other struggles than your own, Warden Shadowsong. Some of them are more important." "Nothing is more important than the overthrow of Illidan." "Perhaps to you. We Aldor have different priorities and limited resources. We need time to gather our strength." Frustration filled the warden. Why was it so difficult to get the people of Outland to see the importance of her mission? She felt a tingling against her breast. It was from the stone Akama had given her. This was not the usual time they had set for their meetings. Something urgent must have come up. Perhaps it was just as well. She did not want to continue this fruitless circular argument with Ishanah anyway. "I thank you for your time," Maiev said, "and ask your permission to depart." Without waiting for it, she turned and strode back to the elevator, followed by Anyndra. She needed a quiet place to communicate with Akama. She hoped that he would prove less useless than the Aldor.
* * *
THE STREETS OF SHATTRATH'S lower terrace seemed more crowded every day. More and more refugees flooded into the city, fleeing from Illidan's wars of conquest and the aftermath of his losing battles with the Legion. They seemed determined to place themselves under the protection of the Sha'tar.
Maiev glanced over her shoulder. A blood elf hurried through the street behind her, face cowled, a scarf wound over her lower jaw. There was something in her manner that was familiar. Perhaps she was spying on Maiev. It did not matter. Sarius was out there in the crowd, watching her back. Perhaps sometime, she would order him to capture one of those who dogged her steps. At the moment, she had other matters to consider. She stepped into the courtyard of the Refuge of the Broken. The usual wretches looked up from their sour watered wine, or stared at the ceiling in a numbed stupor. The air stank of the rough tobacco they smoked. It reeked of their unwashed bodies. She made her way to the chamber in which she had previously met with Akama, and she was unsurprised to find him there. Two of the Ashtongue guards who had watched over him before minded the door and let her pass without comment. The Broken rose and bowed to her in greeting. At least he showed her some respect. Over the last few years, they had reached an understanding of sorts. She inclined her head regally in acknowledgment. "What news?" Maiev asked. She hoped it was better than their last meeting, which had concerned only some minor victory in Illidan's war against the Legion. "Great news," Akama said. The excitement in his voice communicated itself to her. "Prince Kael'thas is missing, along with some of his army. It is likely that he has abandoned the Betrayer." Maiev could not keep the smile of triumph from her face. "If that is true, then Illidan has lost one of the great props to his power." She let the words hang in the air. In the past, Akama had refused to commit his people because Illidan was supported by Kael'thas and Lady Vashj. Akama's smile matched her own only for a moment. "Illidan may have found a new source of power." A chill of foreboding passed through Maiev. Perhaps the Betrayer had a trick to play yet. It would not be the first time. "What is it?" "I am not certain, which is why I wanted to talk to you. They are recruited entirely from your people ..." "My people?" "Elves. Desperate, ruthless elves, hardened fighters all, and all with a grudge against the Burning Legion, as far as I can tell. He takes them and he kills them."
"What?" "He infuses them with fel magic. Most of them die during the process, and those who live are changed, and not for the better." "What do you mean?" "Their bodies are saturated with evil power, and there is something in them that reeks of the demonic." Horror twisted Maiev's face. "He is transforming elves into demons." "Unless I miss my guess, he is remaking them in his own image. He works rituals upon them. He supervises as they receive tattoos like his. He teaches them magic, or at least so I gather from the rumors picked up by my agents. All of this takes place in sealed courtyards far from the everyday business of the temple." What new monstrousness is Illidan planning? Maiev wondered. Knowing him, it could not be anything good. "You must find out more of this." "I am doing my best, but it is difficult and dangerous. The Betrayer has taken great pains to hide his intentions for this new army. If I ask too many questions, I may be found out. If Illidan learns of our association, I am worse than dead. I must move cautiously." "Cautiously, cautiously, it is always cautiously with you." "That is easy for you to say. I am the one who will face the wrath of the Betrayer if things go wrong." Akama paused and took a rasping breath. "You do not know what it is like. Every time I leave the Temple of Karabor, I must lie. I think already Illidan suspects something ... I feel as if I am being watched." It came to Maiev that in her impatience, she was in danger of taking the wrong tack. Akama was clearly frightened, and not without good reason. Akama took another deep breath and spoke in a more measured tone. "It is not the first time tattooed fighters have appeared around the temple. There have been others like this before, but only seen in ones or twos, and never for long before they went on their way. This time all of them are here, and he seems bent on creating many more like them." "The first of them could have been experiments, intended to test the magic used in creating these demon elves." "Such was my thought. Now there seem to be many more of them. Illidan spends lives like a drunken mercenary squanders ill-gotten silver in order to
create them. For every ten who go into the hidden courts, perhaps one comes out." This news changed Maiev's mood. Her earlier good humor about Kael'thas's disappearance had evaporated. She knew in her heart of hearts that Illidan planned some new deviltry. "I do not like this at all," Maiev said. Akama shrugged. "These new creatures are powerful. I have been called upon to heal them, and I sense strong, dark magic within them. Perhaps Illidan feels they will tip the scales back in his favor." "Do you think that is possible?" "He seems determined to create hundreds of these creatures, if not thousands. If they are all as mighty as the ones I have seen, they could change the balance of power in Outland. All I know is that the Betrayer is in a frenzy to recruit as many of them as possible. I have sensed that he has a purpose in mind, and whatever it is, time is running out." "Time is certainly running out for him," Maiev said, trying to re-create her earlier mood. "Without Kael'thas's support, there is a chance to unseat him." "Indeed," said Akama. "I will return to the Temple of Karabor and begin preparations. If we are to move, we must move quickly, before his new army is ready." Satisfaction filled Maiev's mind. It was the first time the Broken had expressed a definite commitment to action. It seemed that he, just as much as the Betrayer, felt time was getting short.
* * *
AKAMA PASSED THROUGH THE portal and stepped into the Temple of Karabor. Despite all the corruption about him, it still felt like coming home. He rubbed his hands together, took a deep breath, and tried to push his worries away. Confronting Maiev was always nerve racking. She was so full of rage and hate, and she was so determined to take Illidan to task for all his wrongdoing. She really did not seem to realize that she had turned herself into the Betrayer's mirror image. The Broken hurried through the corridors toward his chambers. One of the abominable eyeless soldiers glanced at him as he passed. It was eerie how those blind-seeming heads turned to track him as he went by.
All around, the temple buzzed with activity. Soldiers marched, magi wove spells. The defenses were being strengthened night and day. He reached the sanctuary of his people. His bodyguard gave him a warning sign, and as he passed the entrance, he understood why. Illidan waited within the chamber. In his hand, he had a precious crystal statue that Akama had preserved from the destruction of the temple. He held it up to the light, turning it this way and that. He did not look around as the Broken entered. He just said, "Ah, Akama, you have been hard to find today." There had been a time when this simple trick would have disconcerted Akama, but he was used to it now. "I went traveling to Orebor Harborage. I had much to think about, and it helps clear my head." "You have been doing that a lot over the past few years." Akama's stomach lurched. Did the Betrayer suspect what was going on? Had he seen through the deceptions? Illidan walked over and placed an arm around Akama's shoulder. The tips of his talons dug gently into the cloth of the Broken's tunic. "Walk with me to the refectory. It has been some time since we talked. I would learn more of these jaunts of yours." With irresistible strength, he guided Akama through the exit that led into the temple's Sanctuary of Shadows. Demons moved into position all around him. Akama glanced at the great chains hanging from the darkened pillars that rose so high above. They seemed like a dark omen. Soon screams rang out as if from someone whose soul was being ripped from his body.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN Three Months Before the Fall
VANDEL LEAPT THROUGH THE BLAZING RING, HIT the ground rolling, ducked under the swinging blade. It passed him by a hair's breadth. He rose, sprang forward over the flame pit. He was first again. He had passed through all the obstacles without taking a scratch. Cyana was just behind him, not even breathing hard. She smiled at him, but he sensed that she was piqued that he had beaten her again. She was very competitive. Ravael was next, lithe and swift. The others filtered in one after another. In the weeks after the ritual, there had been many losses. Mavelith and Seladan and Isteth had hurled themselves from the battlements, unable to bear what they had become. Mavelith and Seladan had grown progressively more monstrous looking as the days dragged into weeks, but Isteth still had the beauty that Vandel had noticed during the first days. It was her mind that had been twisted. He hoped she was at peace now, joined at last with her dead children. Any hope that the ritual had winnowed out those who could not face the consequences of their choices was gone. Over half of those transformed had died in the process. Their hearts had stopped, or their minds had cracked and they had needed to be put down. More had gone mad in the aftermath, unable to bear the visions they witnessed or to live with the things resident inside them. Vandel had no doubt that their demons had pushed them over the edge. The thing within him made its presence felt every day, and he was by no means certain that he would win this struggle in the long run. There were days when depression and self-loathing made his life unbearable. There were times when he was so filled with rage that he could barely restrain himself
from running through the temple and slashing elves with his blades until the guards dragged him down. Selenis had gone out that way, and Balambor and Turanis. They had taken a lot of others with them. All of the survivors of the ritual understood what they had felt. Vandel had come within a hair's breadth of doing it himself. He sometimes wondered if the difference between him and the berserkers was just that he had not quite reached the brink yet. He clutched the amulet he had made for Khariel tight in his hand, a talisman of protection against the possibility, a reminder to himself of why he fought with his demon every day. Vengeance, Son. One day you will have vengeance. Something at the back of his mind mocked him, but for today, at least he could ignore it. Things had gotten worse since the supernatural part of the training started. Their instructors, Varedis, Alandien, and Netharel, taught them how to tap the fel powers of the demons within them, how to channel the darkest energies in creation. In a way it was thrilling. Vandel knew now how to augment his strength and speed manyfold. He could drive the blade of his dagger into a boulder and rip it free. He had cast bolts of fel energy capable of burning through the strongest of armor. He could heal himself by draining the souls of his fallen victims. He had battled summoned demons, learning how to kill them. At first the aspirants had fought in groups, but as the weeks passed, they had been trained how to win in single combat. Scores had died during that period, and one night a felguard had broken free and rampaged through the corridors of the ruins of Karabor until Varedis had brought him down. Vandel fingered the long scar down his right side that the demon had given him. The felguard's axe had ripped through the inking of his tattoos, distorting them and making it hard to draw on fel energies when he tried to cast certain spells. He had learned an enormous amount in a very brief time, but it seemed no matter how much he grasped, his instructors always wanted him to try harder, master more. They were as driven as Illidan, and he could not help but feel there was some great purpose behind this, that the day was coming when all he had learned would be put to use in the Betrayer's service. There was an urgency about this process, and a desperation. Every day the great ritual was performed. Every day more and more candidates were fed into the hungry
maw of the training process. A few of them survived to be threshed through a system that often seemed intended as much to kill the weak as to teach the strong. Kill the weak. Kill the weak. Kill the weak, the demonic voice whispered. Images of Khariel's half-devoured body flickered mockingly through his mind. Kill them all. All are weak. His dreams were things of horror. One night he woke to find himself standing, clutching his blade. He wondered then if the thing within him gained a measure of control during his nightmares. Tabelius had sneaked through the cells, slitting throats, until Needle ended his nocturnal adventuring forever by putting a skewer through each empty eye socket. There were times when Vandel felt as if he were locked in a cage with murderous beasts, and he was not the least murderous of them. He looked around him again. Illidan had been right. He could see things now as well as ever he had seen when he possessed eyes of flesh. Better. Darkness obscured nothing. Something in his mind adjusted his perceptions. He suspected the demon aided him. It wanted him to master these powers, as if the more he mastered, the more vulnerable he became to the temptations the demon put before him. No matter. He wanted the strength. He was glad he could see. He was glad he could hear better than any elf had a right to. He was glad he was strong as an ogre and swifter than a nightsaber. His appearance reflected the changes. He could extend claws from his fingertips, and did so in moments of danger. Massive scars marked where he had gouged himself with his dagger. The mirror showed him that a fel green glow had replaced his eyes. It intensified when he used the power. A hand descended on his shoulder. "Exhausted, are you, old one?" Cyana asked. Vandel shook his head. "I am just getting started." "I hope so," said Ravael. "This sparring session, I am going to beat you. Do not give in too easily. When you struggle, it only makes my victory all the sweeter." Victory is sweet, said the voice in his head. Every day it sounded more like his own. Flesh is sweeter still.
* * *
THEY ENTERED THE COURTYARD. The high, crumbling walls of Karabor's ruins loomed over the aspirants, massive and imprisoning. Tattooed elves crowded the open spaces between the training rings, waiting for their chance to fight. Greenish-yellow glowing runes, chiseled into the flagstones, formed the circumference of the mystic circles. The runes' shapes suggested similarities to the tattoos inked on the aspirants' skin. Each ring contained two combatants fighting under the supervision of one of the trainers. Spell-wrought auras surrounded their weapons and blunted the force of their blows, turning them from fatal into something merely bruising and painful. Vandel watched a pair of fighters circle and strike until one knocked the other down. "I claim victory!" the winner shouted, while the loser lolled on the ground in defeat. Varedis nodded and raised his hand, and the combat was over. The circle emptied. The trainer gestured for Ravael and Vandel to begin. Ravael stepped into the circle, a scythe in each hand. Protective auras shimmered around their blades. Varedis put the spell on Vandel's runic dagger and the other blade he had taken from the temple armory. Vandel stepped into the circle. Ravael made an obscene gesture with his right-hand weapon. "Today you will learn the meaning of defeat." He sprang, blazingly fast, uncannily precise in his movements. The ritual had granted Ravael even more strength and speed than it had given Vandel. It had gifted him with huge claws and twisted, circular horns. Now, in the arena, as he drew upon his demonic powers, those attributes seemed even more pronounced. The scythe impacted on Vandel's biceps with numbing force. "If this were a real fight, you would have lost your arm," Ravael taunted. Anger surged deep within Vandel. That had not been fair. He dismissed the thought. In combat, no demon would give him a fair chance. "In a real fight, I would come and tear your heart out." He meant the words to sound mocking, but they came out utterly serious, and he knew, even as they left his lips, that he meant them. Ravael unleashed a flurry of blows, but this time Vandel was ready. Dagger clattered against
scythe. The sound of metal on metal rang around the courtyard. Every blow Ravael launched, Vandel parried. At the end of the storm of attacks, he reached out and struck Ravael just above the heart with his dagger. If he had been a fraction quicker, he would have struck the equivalent of a killing blow, but as it was, he would merely have wounded his foe. "A scratch," said Ravael. A spark of berserk rage ignited within Vandel's chest. He would not be mocked. Not by one as weak and pitiful as this. Something in Ravael sensed his mood and responded. The air between them crackled with tension. Vandel threw himself forward, aiming at Ravael's head. Ravael raised both scythes, caught his blade, and twisted, but as he did so Vandel's second blade connected with his stomach. "And now you would be dead," Vandel said, and something within him wished his foe was. "I win again." He was about to turn away when he heard Ravael growling. A low, bestial sound emerged from deep within the other elf's chest. Spittle dripped from the corner of his mouth. His eye sockets were pools of blood in which witch fires danced. Balls of ruddy light flickered around the tips of his horns. "I am not defeated," said Ravael. His voice was thick and guttural and full of hate. Power clotted in the air around him. A sheen of shadow passed across his body, turning his skin first gray and then blacker than night. Great wings of shadow lifted from Ravael's back. Vandel felt the air displaced by their movement. He could smell brimstone and the aura of demon, stronger in his nostrils than at any time save when he had fought with real denizens of the Nether realms. Ravael sprang forward, bringing his blades down. Both blows impacted painfully on Vandel's arms. This time there was no doubt he would be either crippled or dead if the fight had been a real one. It was not enough for his opponent. Ravael rained down blow after agonizing blow. Vandel brought his own blades up and managed to parry the first scythe. The second one caught him above the temple. Pain lanced his brow. The metallic tang of blood filled his nostrils. Shadow had engulfed the scythes in Ravael's hands, drowning out the protective spells. His power overcame the wards upon the blades. The scythes
were deadly now, and Ravael was intent upon using them. No one made any move to intervene. Spectators licked their lips. Varedis made a careless gesture, indicating that the fight should continue. He looked more interested than worried by this latest development. The scythes flicked out. More blood flowed. Ravael smiled. White fangs became visible within his shadowy outline. "This time I will win." No one was going to intervene as long as Ravael did not leave the circle. Vandel could step outside it himself and put an end to things by admitting defeat. He was tempted to do so, but something in him responded to the smell of his own blood and the feeling of pain. Rage reddened his vision, and with it came power. He raised his hands and wove a thunderbolt of fel energy. It surged out from his pointing finger and smashed into Ravael. The ravenous green energy tore at the shadowy integument, shredding it to blackened tatters. He fed more strength into the spell. Ravael screamed as his flesh roasted. Vandel knew that he should stop, but part of him did not want to, and it was not just the demonic part. He wanted Ravael to experience the same pain that he had. He poured more and more of his strength into the bolt. His heart sounded loud as a drumbeat. Breath emerged in ragged gasps. He changed the focus of the spell once he knew Ravael was dead, drawing shadowy globules of the defeated elf's corrupted soul into his own, channeling the stolen power and using it to heal his wounds. Vandel knew he should feel guilty, but he did not. He felt exaltation. His only regret was that he had to restrain himself from feasting. The smell of burned demon flesh was still in the air, and it made his mouth water. He looked around at the faces clustered at the edge of the circle. He was tempted to unleash his power on them, to strike and slay and kill, to slake the thirst for destruction that this combat had aroused. But that would be fatal, and he was not quite ready to die yet. He fought the urge down. The thunder of his heartbeat became softer in his ears. His breathing became more regular. He waited to see what his instructor would do. Varedis just shook his head, as if he had seen things like this before and they did not trouble him. He tried to kill you, said the voice in his head. And if you had not drawn on my power, he would have succeeded. You owe me your life. It was true, Vandel realized. He had slain one of the other recruits, and no
one appeared to be doing anything about it. He stepped outside the circle. "I claim victory," he said. "You are victorious," Varedis replied.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN Three Months Before the Fall
ILLIDAN TOOK NINE PACES ACROSS THE FLOOR of his chamber, turned, and took nine paces back. He felt calmer now. His thoughts returned to Akama. That the Broken had conspired with Maiev Shadowsong had almost cost the Ashtongue leader his life. Maiev, of all elves! Illidan would have rewarded his treachery with death, but he still needed Akama and his people, so he had devised another and better punishment. That thought gave him considerable satisfaction. He had ensured the Broken would never betray him again. Not only that, but he had found a way to get Akama to deliver Maiev into his hands. And he had fit it all into his scheme to strike back against the Burning Legion. Now he had only one more problem to solve, and he was close to doing that. Illidan looked down at the massive oaken desk. On it lay a number of maps and charts, held down by the Skull of Gul'dan. The patterns inscribed on them in demon blood were written in a notation that he had created himself and that only he understood completely. The geometric runes mapped the flows of energy between the portals of Outland and their terminus points in parts of the Twisting Nether. He rubbed his brow and concentrated. He was on the edge of a breakthrough. It was so close he could almost taste it. He had spent years accumulating this information, plundering it from libraries and wizards' collections all over Outland. He had visited every location marked on the map and used geomantic sorcery to chart the outflows of power into the Twisting Nether. He had interrogated thousands of demons, listened for clues in the speech of Magtheridon and a dozen of the nathrezim, the so-called dreadlords. He had used spells to follow the trace energies of a thousand summonings. He
had tortured and devoured imps and overmastered succubi. He had spent years putting together clues, and finally he was ready. He had been goaded by the half-recalled memories he had acquired from Gul'dan when he had absorbed the power of the orc warlock's skull. Gul'dan's visions had hinted at a way to achieve his wildest dreams. He had seen things that no other mortal had, and the recollections haunted Illidan. Excitement grew within him. Finally, at long last, he saw the pattern. The old warlock had been right. There were complex weaves of power. A mesh that fed upon itself and drew energy from the land and air around it. It held the portals open against the natural inclination of reality to force them shut. It opened pathways among dozens of worlds. Some of the arcs were incomplete. He knew they must go somewhere. Given what he knew about the forces involved, he could work out their eventual termination points with complex astronomical calculations. He could finally create the divination spell that could search through those portals and find what he was looking for. He needed to act soon, before word leaked and one of the nathrezim worked out what he was doing. The dreadlords were too damnably clever, and if they acted to forestall him, all his years of sacrifice, all the decades of planning, would be in vain. Wearily, but filled with growing excitement, he inscribed the syllables of the great spell. When it was done, he laid down his pen atop the sheet of parchment with a sense of profound satisfaction. He was as ready as he was ever going to be. It was time to act.
* * *
ILLIDAN WALKED DEEPER INTO the great circular chamber. On the floor, inscribed in the blood of demons and elves and draenei, pulsed a duplicate of the patterns on his charts, written a hundred times larger. Glowing runes clustered around the edges, shaping the cataracts of fel energy flowing into the chamber. He walked around the edge, muttering spells of warding and shielding. He wanted no prying eyes witnessing what he did here, no possible intrusions to disturb his concentration. He spoke a word of power and all the doors closed. The seals were so tight that eventually the air would turn poisonous with the
effusions of his own breath. If he remained lost in the ritual too long, this place would become his tomb. He walked through a gap in the huge pattern and followed it to the middle of the chamber, careful not to step on any of the lines. The slightest break would be fatal. At the exact center of the chamber, he spread his wings, let them beat once, and hovered in the air. He pulled his legs up underneath him into the lotus position and invoked magic that let him remain hovering above the ground. He spoke another word of power, and the braziers set at each point of the compass burst into flames, igniting the aromatic essences they contained. Clouds of hallucinogenic smoke flowed through the air. Tendrils of burning incense slithered through the pattern until they reached his nostrils. He took three deep breaths, and each of them drove the vapor deeper into his lungs. He closed his mouth and held it in, until he felt as if he had absorbed every last fraction of the power it contained. Long practice in alchemy let him identify the individual components. Doomguard bone, ground with a mortar and pestle carved from the skeleton of a dragon; powdered felhound blood; distilled essence of felweed; a thousand different items. All chosen to activate key sections of his sorcerer's mind and free his soul. Ancient hungers tugged, tempting him to bathe in those evil energies. His skin tingled. The hair on his scalp rose. His tongue felt thick. Power flowed into him. So much power. He felt like a god, as if he had only to will something to happen in order to make it so. He held the energy for a moment, just letting it stay within him, enjoying the sensation of being on the brink. Of his last moment of calm. After this, everything would change. Slowly, delicately, as if he were taking a scalpel to a butterfly's wing, he invoked the last stages of the spell. A sensation of lightness struck him as his spirit dissociated from his body. He looked down upon his empty shell, hovering in the air below him. He felt a moment of vertigo, a sharp stab of fear. At this moment his spirit was vulnerable. If anything happened to him here, he would die. A silver thread, so thin as to be almost invisible, connected him to the husk beneath him. If that was separated, his spirit would wander forever, unable to return to his body.
He felt the absence of so many things. No heartbeat. No blood flowing in his veins. No air rasping into his lungs. No tug of gravity on flesh and bone and muscle. Ever since Sargeras had taken his eyes, back when Illidan had first joined the Legion, he had been able to see into the Twisting Nether. It had taken him centuries to realize what he could do with this power. For decades dreadful dreams had blasted his sanity and driven him screaming from sleep. It had been one of the worst torments of his long imprisonment. He doubted anyone else could have endured what he had in order to harness this power to their will. Anyone who had not mastered sorcery as he had would have been incapable of the feat. It had been necessary, though. It had given him the ability to send his soul out into the Twisting Nether and the Great Dark Beyond, to see other worlds, other universes. It had given him terrifying insight into the plans and goals of the Burning Legion. Now he needed to stretch himself farther than he had ever done before, reach deeper into the infinite abyss in search of his ultimate goal. The fel power channeled by the great pattern roared around him. He studied it, knowing it to be both a map and a key that would open the way to where he had to go. He molded the flows of magic slowly, lacking the physical cues he normally took for granted. Air did not caress his limbs. Words did not cause his diaphragm to vibrate. The power moved sluggishly in response to his will. He shaped it, channeling it through the pattern, aiming it toward the chink in the wards he had created. Like water flowing down a ravine, the spell surged through the tiny opening, creating a gap in the fabric of reality that opened out into somewhere else. Illidan focused his attention on that space. If something waited on the other side, it would attack as soon as the chink was wide enough to pass through. At this moment, he was very vulnerable. His strength was not what it was when anchored by his corporeal form. He waited, hoping against hope that there was nothing there. He could ill afford the distraction or the time or the energy it would take to defend himself. Nothing happened. He allowed his spirit to go with the flow of energy and pass through the opening between worlds and out into the Twisting Nether. It exploded into being around him.
There were a thousand ways to perceive this place. Every voyager saw it differently, depending on circumstance and form and state of mind. For him it was a black, airless void in which a billion stars twinkled. Behind and beneath him blazed the world from which he had come. Through the void trailed the snake of energy he had summoned, guiding him outward into infinity. It represented the flows of energy of the portals the Burning Legion used to get to Outland. With an effort of will, he sent himself flashing along the trail, faster than light, quick as thought, until he found the first connecting portal. He descended from the Nether and flashed over a world. He looked upon a desert where once fields had grown, cemetery cities where unburied bodies clogged the streets. Eerie green energy flickered from disrupted portals. Amid the ruins imps frolicked and shouted obscenities. One or two sensed his proximity and peered about them as if nearsighted. In the distance an infernal lumbered, all blazing skin and burning rock for limbs. He flashed from place to place, finding no sign of life, witnessing only destruction. He flowed past bunkers where the skeletons of creatures smaller than elves lay beside the alien weapons that had not saved them. He flashed past suits of corroded mirrored armor and the wreckage of burned-out battle machines. War had blasted the landscape, slicing off the tops of hills, turning fertile plains to sheets of glass. The mad ghosts of a sad people keened songs of defeat and despair. Nothing lived save a few demons that had been stranded when the Burning Legion moved on to its next conquest, or had been left to stand guard over the waypoints of the Legion's march. Mountains had been carved to resemble dreadlords. A moat of bones surrounded the corpse of a city the size of a nation. A giant animated skeleton rose from the ossuary sea and clawed its way over a mountain of ribs and skulls and thighbones, until its spark of necromantic energy faded and it tumbled back into the mass from which it had emerged. He followed the trail of his spell through another portal and emerged onto a different world. Water had once covered its surface, but now the ocean was red as blood, filled with poisons that had killed the whale-sized inhabitants. Massive rafts woven from dead kelp rotted on the surface. The corpses of merfolk were entwined around them. The cadavers of creatures the size of cities decomposed on the ocean floor, surrounded by the skeletons of the
aquatic armies that had once guarded them. Nothing lived, not even the smallest particle of plankton. The air itself was turning poisonous without plants to purify it and keep it alive. He passed through another portal. A world of deserts and fire. Here and there he came upon the bones of wandering tribespeople and their pack animals. The wells of every oasis had been poisoned. The sun blazed down on an empty landscape of shifting dunes, to which only the wind gave animation. Sometimes they crumbled to reveal the skeletons of great armored worms or the acid-pitted ruins of brass skyscrapers. On and on his spirit flashed, passing through dead world after dead world, monuments to the eternal malice of the Burning Legion. Everywhere lay ruin. This would be the fate of Azeroth and Outland and the few remaining living worlds once the Burning Legion attacked. He searched for traces of life and found nothing, not even a cockroach or a rat. Sargeras's army had set out to cleanse these places of every living thing and it had succeeded. Illidan had known what to expect and still it appalled him, this senseless, monstrous violence, this hatred of all life, this wanton murder of world after world after world. He had been a fighter all his days. He had fought and killed and hated, but still he struggled to imagine what drove the Burning Legion to this. Here and there he came upon hubs where the ways split and the paths of conquest led onward across multiple routes to multiple worlds. Always his spell guided him, his spirit questing through infinite worlds, seeking, seeking, seeking ... He lost all track of time. He had no idea whether a hundred seconds or a hundred years had passed back upon the world where his body waited. Perhaps he was already dead and his spirit was doomed to wander these infinite wastelands, a spectral witness to the doom of countless worlds. He passed through another gate, despairing, hopeless, certain that he had miscalculated. This one was an odd place, a collection of rocks imbued with potent magic, floating amid the infinite void of the Twisting Nether. A tiny sun orbited it every few minutes. Dozens of miniature glowing moons followed it. Bits of rock floated in the air, held aloft by the power of magic. Potent energies saturated this place, were sunk into the very fabric of the world, and they were not the only thing here. In the distance, amid the rocks, he sensed the presence of demons of a very specific sort: nathrezim.
Was it possible he had finally found what he was looking for: Nathreza, the home of the dreadlords?
* * *
HUNDREDS OF DREADLORDS WERE certainly here, and thousands of their servants. Cautiously he advanced. The nathrezim were creatures of power, with a near-unparalleled capacity for working magic. They would have no difficulty detecting his spirit form unless he was very, very careful. Even now Illidan thought he sensed something watching. He froze. Nothing happened. The dreadlords did not respond to his presence. Perhaps it was nothing, merely his own too-wary mind. His bodiless state prevented him from feeling any of the physical expressions of excitement. His heart did not race. His mouth did not go dry. A cold feeling of triumph filled him. He had found it. The place he had always suspected existed was here. Do not be too certain, he cautioned himself. You do not know that yet. You need confirmation. He drifted closer to the presence of the dreadlords, following the lay of the land and the pattern of the rocks, weaving spells of concealment and misdirection around himself. His spirit was strong but not as strong as it was when it occupied his body. There were beings here who could end his existence if they spotted him. He searched for any spells that might alert the inhabitants to his presence. A city of basalt towers lit by the flare of green fel lanterns stood before him. Disks of basalt rose up the sides of buildings. Huge dreadlords flapped across the skies. It was odd to see so many sentient beings after passing across so many dead worlds. He saw palaces where nathrezim planned the destruction of worlds, the enslavement of civilizations, where the end of all existence was plotted by beings sworn to the service of Sargeras. Servitors guided odd machines on unguessable errands. In the center of it all stood one gigantic windowless tower amid a grid of energy flows. Baleful green runes lit up its sides. Legions of servitors came and went. No doubt about it; he had found what he sought. Gul'dan's visions had not lied. He made careful calculations of the position and pattern of the gates that had carried him here, studying the astrological significance of the stars that
glittered in the sky; then, when he was certain he had fixed in his mind all the information he had come here to find, he terminated the spell of spirit walking. The silver cord tightened and drew him with unimaginable speed back to his body. Heavy flesh and dense bone imprisoned him once more. Air thundered back into his lungs. He stretched, reveling in the feel of muscles answering the commands of his will. He took a deep breath, identifying the scents. A smile flickered across his face. Now he would take the war to the Burning Legion. Now he would make his enemies pay. All of them.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN Three Months Before the Fall
MAIEV DUCKED THE OGRE'S BLOW AND SLICED his stomach open with the return stroke of her blade. The creature gave an idiotic chuckle and clutched at his intestines with one meaty hand, trying to hold them in. With his free hand, he brought his massive club swinging back. She jumped over the tree-trunksized weapon. There were times when she thought it was true what they said about ogres, that the creatures felt no pain. Anyndra threw herself out of the way, but tripped over a clutching root and stumbled back into the murky water. Sarius growled. His cat form emerged from the shadows and pounced on the ogre's back. Claws raked, drawing blood. Maiev focused her power, blinked through the intervening space. She aimed a blow at the jugular. Blood sprayed. This time the ogre fell. Anyndra rolled clear of the tumbling corpse and stood. Algae-discolored water streamed from her hair and turned her tunic a muddy brown. Maiev glanced around. Her troops were finishing off the ogres. She could not guess what foolishness had made the huge brutes ambush them. They had grown more and more aggressive toward travelers on the roads through Zangarmarsh in the past few months. It seemed they had forged an alliance with Vashj's naga. Whatever spell engines the serpent folk were building neared completion. Maiev's efforts to sabotage them had met with failure. All she had managed to do was free some Broken slaves, useless as recruits to her forces. She counted fallen combatants. Two draenei corpses lay in the water, heads submerged in a way that told her they would not be getting up. Sarius had already begun healing the wounded. She felt the surge of druidic power as he set an arm broken by an ogre's club.
Anyndra shook her head, sending drops of water splashing down into the murk. Maiev wiped sweat from her brow, then swatted a huge insect that had landed on the back of her hand. Its blood-bloated body burst, staining her hand crimson. By Elune, there were times when she hated those little monsters more than she hated those who abused magic. "I think we have taught them not to attack us again," Anyndra said. She studied the body of the fallen ogre. He must have weighed as much as ten elves even though he was only half again as tall. He was so broad as to seem almost squat, and a thick layer of fat overlaid his swollen muscles. Red and brown mingled in the water around him. A water-walking insect had its feet stained red. A large fish broke the surface and took it down in one gulp. "They are too stupid to learn that lesson," Maiev said. She squatted down and washed her hands in the water. She could not get them truly clean, but at least the blood came off. "No matter how many of them we kill, they will insist on fighting." "What do you think the naga are up to?" Anyndra asked. Maiev shook her head. Her lieutenant persisted in questioning her as if she had an answer for everything. "I do not know. But if Illidan wants it done, we must see that it is not." Anyndra looked away as if the answer had disappointed her. Maiev wished she had a better one. She wished she could think of some way of taking the war to Illidan, but the Betrayer had not stirred from his fortress in the weeks since Akama had reported Kael'thas's disappearance. No doubt Illidan felt vulnerable without the blood elf prince's aid against the Burning Legion, but Kael'thas's absence had not helped her cause any. She pushed the thought away. It was too easy to give in to despair. She would find a way of bringing Illidan to justice. She just needed to keep trying and the way would open. She was a night elf, and she was used to thinking she had all the time in the world. Of course, since the devastation of the World Tree Nordrassil and the loss of the night elves' immortality, that was no longer true, but old habits died hard. A tingling sensation started at her right side. She stepped into a patch of shadow. She took the stone Akama had given her out of her pouch and focused her thoughts on it. The image of the leader of the Ashtongue appeared in her mind. The Broken looked even more shriveled with age. His
eyes were tiny pinpricks. There were deep lines on his face that had not been there before. "What is it?" Maiev asked, knowing her voice would be heard by no one but Akama and herself. "Meet me in Orebor Harborage. Things move swiftly. The time for our vengeance has arrived." Akama sounded tired and listless. His voice was feeble in a way she could not ever recall it sounding before. Perhaps something was interfering with the spell, she told herself. Perhaps it was just her imagination. "What? How?" "Meet me where we first met. I have much to tell you, and it is best we be prepared to move at an instant's notice. Make sure your people are ready to fight." "What is going on?" "I do not have time to explain. I must go, and go now. Meet me and be ready." Abruptly the contact was cut. Maiev wondered what was going on. Had the long-awaited hour finally arrived? She put the stone away and stepped out into the light once again. "Mount up," she said. "We are going to Orebor Harborage." Some of the troops groaned. They had been expecting a rest after the battle. The urgency of Akama's summons was going to deny them that. Having a chance to capture the Betrayer, at long last, far outweighed their desire or any good they might do here destroying the naga's spell engines. "We ride," Maiev said. Her followers leapt into their saddles. They left the corpses of their foes behind them as food for the denizens of the great marsh.
* * *
MAIEV PACED IMPATIENTLY INSIDE the hut Akama maintained for their meetings in Orebor Harborage. Her troops watched her closely through the windows. They had learned to step warily when she was in this mood. Where was that damn Broken? He had communicated urgency, but now he could not even be bothered to show up.
She put her hands by her sides and smoothed the seam of her tabard. It did not do to reveal too much impatience in front of the troops. They looked to her for leadership. She slowed her stride, measured her pacing, and turned her thoughts inward. It was not like Akama to be late. The Broken never missed a meeting. He usually turned up early for them. She hoped nothing had happened to him. It would mean the loss of a highly placed spy if the Betrayer had slain him for treason. That would never happen. Akama had eluded Illidan's gaze for years, and that spoke of a far greater-than-average ability to hide things. He had deceived even Illidan. All he had to do was continue to do so for a bit longer. She thought about the strangeness of it all. Her strongest ally in Outland was a mutated aberration who served her greatest enemy. He had proved more reliable than any of the so-called leaders of the forces of Light. She told herself she should have more faith, but she struggled with that. It was not easy to let go of things, to pass control to someone else. The air shimmered. A way opened. Akama stepped through. His shoulders were slumped and his eyes were downcast. His steps dragged even more than usual. "Greetings," he said. "I bring grave news." He looked up at her, and his eyes seemed sunken, their glow dimmed. "Let us hope that it brings us a little closer to victory than your last tidings. Prince Kael'thas may be a deserter, but that has done us no good." Akama stumbled over to a table and poured himself a goblet of wine. He seemed to have aged significantly since the last time they had met. His hand shook as he put the jug down. "You look as if you have seen better days," Maiev said. Akama shrugged and spread his arms wide. "The Betrayer has had me working magic day and night since last we spoke. It has drained me. His schemes come to a head. And I believe I know what he is up to." "Tell me!" "Give me a moment," the Broken said. He took out a small flask of magical elixir and stirred it into the wine. He raised the mixture to his lips and downed it in one gulp. Within heartbeats, he stood taller and some of the weariness faded from his frame. Maiev's eyes narrowed. She had never seen
him like this before. She had never suspected he needed unnatural stimulants to maintain his strength. "Are you all right?" Akama's head bobbed slowly up and down. He seemed to want to reassure her but appeared incapable of it. His movements were still slow and pained. He looked as if he was very ill. Perhaps the strain of his long subterfuge was taking a toll on his health. "The Betrayer has finally revealed his hand. He plans on opening a new gateway." "Can you be more specific than that?" "I know only the rumors that I have heard around the temple. And I have managed to take a look around his sanctum, and I have found clues that he plans to perform some sort of mighty ritual." Disappointment lent anger to Maiev's tone. "None of this is of any great help to us. If he remains within the Black Temple, there is nothing we can do. He is too well guarded." At this point Akama smiled. It was like watching a cold moon emerge from behind dark clouds. A strange glint entered his eyes. "To perform this ritual, he is going to have to leave the temple." "What do you mean?" "The portal can only be opened at a specific time and place. And that place is not within the Temple of Karabor." "How can you be so certain of this?" "I managed to get a glimpse at the scrolls he has prepared. Some of them contained maps." Is it really possible? Maiev wondered. Was she finally about to get the opportunity she had waited so long for? "Maps of where?" "The Hand of Gul'dan." "The volcano in Shadowmoon Valley? Why there?" "It is a location upon which enormous powers are focused. Gul'dan severed the orcish people's connection with the elemental spirits there." "Illidan will be well guarded," Maiev said. Once again Akama gave that strange, cold smile. He shook his head. "All of the signs point to the fact that he plans to move in great secrecy. He is assembling supplies for only a few." "How do you know this?"
"One of the advantages of being a Broken is that almost all the slaves and servants in the temple speak my language, belong to my people. Few notice the lowly Broken, but we see many things. There is little that is done there that I do not have some inkling about." "You think he is planning on performing the ritual in secret." "He has talked to me about needing to make a trip in the utmost secrecy within the next few days." "Why has he talked to you about this?" Maiev was suddenly suspicious. "Since the prince of the blood elves vanished, Illidan has taken me more and more into his confidence. He needs someone to take charge within the temple while he is away, and the Illidari Council members are all blood elves. He thinks me too lacking in ambition to plot behind his back." Bitterness tinged Akama's speech. "Then he is definitely going," Maiev said. "I have never seen him like this before. He is consumed with excitement. It is as if a plan that he has held for a very long time is coming to fruition. I strongly suspect that it has something to do with all the elves he has been training." Curiosity tugged at Maiev. She had long wondered about the tattooed demonic fighters. "Is he taking them with him?" Akama shook his head. "Their leaders have been told to stand ready to move at a moment's notice. I think the order will come if the ritual proves to be successful. I do not think he wants to risk them beyond the temple if it is not." "He values them so highly?" "They are the apple of his eye. He spends more time with them than he does planning the defense of his empire. It is puzzling. They represent something very important to him but I cannot work out what it is. I believe that it will be revealed within the next few days." "Who will accompany him for the ritual?" "I have studied the duty rosters. Small groups of sorcerers are being dispatched from the temple almost every day. All of them are wizards of considerable strength, and all of them are well practiced in ritual magic." "He intends to assemble them on the Hand of Gul'dan?" "It is the only thing that makes sense." "And you believe he is doing this in secret because ...?"
"He is worried about spies, and not without cause." Akama gave a sour grin. "How many of the sorcerers have been dispatched, and how many more are going to be?" "There will be thirteen groups of thirteen assembled on the slopes of the volcano. The number has mystical significance. It ties in with the number of nodes on the pattern he is trying to create." "Even if there is only a small force, that number of wizards could prove a significant threat." "Not if they are involved in complex ritual magic when the attack comes." Akama's words hung in the air. The moment was finally here. It was now or never. She was never going to get a better chance to attack the Betrayer. If what Akama said was true. "You are certain of this?" Maiev asked. "As certain as I can be of anything, under the circumstances. I believe that the Betrayer will be on the slopes of the Hand of Gul'dan and that he will have those sorcerers with him. He intends to perform a mighty ritual and open a portal to somewhere else. Perhaps he thinks he can escape the vengeance of the Burning Legion by opening a way to some other world, where the demons have not yet established a beachhead." "No." The word escaped from Maiev's mouth before she could stop it. She could not let the Betrayer slip from her grasp again. It would be just like him to leave the defenders of his fortress to face the consequence when the servants of Sargeras arrived. It still did not explain what he was intending to do with his elven trainees, though. "If you will accept my advice," Akama said, "you will take your force to the slopes of the volcano and investigate. If I am wrong, you will have lost nothing. If I am right, you will get the best chance you will ever have of capturing your great foe." "And what about you? Where will you be?" "I will be with you. I want to be there when you overthrow the Betrayer. I will bring my people. We will aid you." Maiev paused for a heartbeat. "Akama ..." "Yes?" "I have been critical of you and your people in the past-suspicious of your motives, too-but this day you have proved that my thoughts were
unworthy. Together we will bring Illidan down." Akama took a deep, rasping breath and held her gaze. "I pray that you are right." "I will tell my people to be ready," Maiev said. "We have far to go and very little time to do it in." "I will open a way for you, and then I will return to the temple and prepare my people. The time has come for us to take vengeance." Maiev shook her head. "The time has come for us to bring the Betrayer to justice." "However you wish to portray it, this is our chance to achieve our goal. Let us overthrow Illidan. Let us free Outland from his wickedness. Let the Temple of Karabor be returned to my people." "It shall be done," Maiev said.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN Three Months Before the Fall
OVER EVERYTHING LAY THE EERIE GLOW OF THE Hand of Gul'dan. The mountain shivered like a whipped dog as the tremors of some yet-unborn earthquake rippled through its belly. Green lava spouted gigantic plumes in the lakes of burning stone visible on the lower slopes. All around, huge cables of magical power billowed. Maiev thought the pre-shocks of this volcanic eruption were connected with the spell being woven. Akama was correct-a ritual of immense power was being enacted here. There could be no doubt of the awesome magnitude of the sorcery being worked. A shower of greenly glowing meteors left a trail across the sky. They were an ominous portent, but of what, she could not tell. Her people, the night elves at least, were shadows among shadows. They moved from rock to rock, silent as assassins come in the night to a king's bedchamber. The draenei and the Broken did not move with the same stealth. They were too big, too clumsy, and too powerful. Akama looked alert and uneasy, as well he might. To one with his sensitivity to the moods of the world, the shaking of the mountain must be very disturbing. She herself was profoundly perturbed. Scores of Ashtongue soldiers lay hidden over the nearby mountainside. Akama had brought a strong bodyguard with him. Everything was as Akama predicted. Groups of thirteen sorcerers stood in circles, weaving the great spell. Some were blood elves. Some were naga. All were potent magi. Lines of magical power danced among them, linking them together. They chanted and gestured, and something answered their call. A few other robed Illidari surrounded them. They might have been bodyguards or servants, but there were fewer of them than there were sorcerers.
The covens were spread out over the mountain. Each of them represented a point in a great pattern, a focus of the energy being directed toward the central altar. As she looked down at it, a smile of triumph flickered on Maiev's lips. The Betrayer himself was there, directing the operations, standing arrogantly at the altar. He wove the great spell like the master magician he was, shaping it into a swirling vortex of potency. She paused to consider the magnitude of the gateway being opened. So much energy, all of it centered on this one spot. Either Illidan proposed summoning a being of truly awesome power, or the portal was intended to bridge a gap across an unimaginable distance. Not that it mattered. He was not going to be given a chance to complete his spell. By now the rest of her squads should be in position. Sarius and his group were in place, ready to slay the sorcerers nearest to Illidan. After that, justice would be done for all of the Betrayer's victims. It would be done with her own sharp blade. She ran her finger along the edge and shivered, imagining it. She glanced over at Akama once more. The Broken licked his lips and nodded. He knew as well as she did that it was time. She raised her armored hand and gave the signal to attack.
* * *
A ROAR SOUNDED IN the distance. A panther-like figure emerged from the shadows and leapt at the throat of a blood elf magician. The sin'dorei screamed and fell. The other sorcerers barely noticed. They were too wrapped up in the casting of spells. Maiev had perfectly chosen the moment to attack. Even the Betrayer did not seem to notice them for an instant. Her draenei and Broken followers emerged from the rocks and charged downslope, brandishing their weapons, invoking powerful spells of offense and defense. The few Illidari surrounding the clumps of sorcerers were taken off guard. Some managed to pull weapons free of their sheaths and form up in small groups, back-to-back. Maiev could only respect such bravery, even if she despised the cause they fought for. Their courage would not make any difference. The numbers favored Maiev and her troops. She did not even need Akama's followers. The
Ashtongue lacked the hard competence of her own people. They had not been honed by months and years of guerrilla warfare in the wastes of Outland. Maiev used her power to blink from her position and reappeared behind a naga sorcerer. Her blade licked out and slit the creature's throat before she could react. A swift step took her within reach of another mage. She struck off the blood elf's arm with one blow. The air shivered. The pulse of magic briefly halted. The other magi redoubled their efforts. It was possible that the spell would run out of control if too many of them were killed. The backlash of such unleashed magic could be catastrophic. Maiev did not care. As long as the spell destroyed Illidan, she would not consider her own death too high a price to pay. Of course, he might yet escape. He was as slippery as a serpent and had a talent for self-preservation equaled only by his talent for treachery. She needed to make sure. Only if he died beneath her blade could she be absolutely certain that her purpose was achieved. The altar lay ahead, and it looked as if, at last, the Betrayer was starting to pay attention to the attack. His warglaives spun in his hands, and he glanced around to see where the threat had come from. Maiev sprinted toward him, hoping to get within range so that she could blink behind him and strike. Illidan's head swiveled to look directly at her. He raised his warglaives as he invoked powerful magic. The spell he wove seemed to have nothing to do with the ritual taking place around them. A magical signal blazed. Maiev sensed the sudden opening of the portals all around her. Gaps appeared in the fabric of reality. Clouds of mist billowed forth from them as differences in temperature and air pressure between the point of origin and the point of terminus manifested. The fog provided cover for the masses of reinforcements emerging through the portals. Hundreds upon hundreds of naga slithered forth, along with companies of fel orcs. The gates appeared between the parties of magicians. In places, the emerging fighters smashed into Maiev's own soldiers. She saw that they needed to throw Illidan's forces back through the gates before the superior numbers could be brought to bear. The portal mouths were not huge. A small number of troops could choke the exit points.
Maiev shouted orders, telling her soldiers to strike at the emerging Illidari. It was a stopgap measure. Sooner or later greater numbers would prevail. That was not the point. All they had to do was buy her time to reach Illidan and put an end to his evil career forever. Even as her troops reacted, she realized that the Betrayer had taken her response into account. There were too many portals for her small force to close them all. Groups of Illidari emerged on the flanks of the swirling melee. She lengthened her stride to try to reach the Betrayer, determined that if nothing else, she would be avenged. As if he knew what she was thinking and wanted to mock her, Illidan spread his wings and leapt into the sky. Maiev sensed more magic being woven and looked around. Amid a court of powerful naga sorcerers stood Lady Vashj. The leader of the Illidari's serpent folk lashed about her with potent spells. Maiev's troops fell as if poleaxed. The bitter taste of defeat filled Maiev's mouth. A massive fel orc leapt in front of her. His monstrous axe swept down. She ducked beneath it, rolled forward, and hamstrung the creature with her umbra crescent. A phalanx of fel orc warriors charged at her. She tensed, ready to spring. A bolt of pure cold shivered through her body, shocking her to a stop. Lady Vashj had made contact with a spell. Howling maniacally, the fel orcs rushed in. Maiev tried to move her frozen muscles, but they refused to respond. She was going to die and Illidan was going to go free once more. The fel orcs closed the distance with terrifying speed. Spittle drooped from the lips of one massive red-skinned creature as he raised his axe to take her head. Maiev refused to shut her eyes. An arrow whizzed out of nowhere and buried itself in the creature's throat. Another one hit him on the shoulder and sent him twisting to the ground. More arrows rained down, killing more fel orcs. All of them had Anyndra's green-and-red fletching. A fel orc tripped over the corpses of his comrades. A berserker leapt over the growing pile and closed the distance. Maiev managed to get her arm moving, attempted a parry. Too slow. Too slow. The great hunting cat that was Sarius leapt in from the side, caught the berserk fel orc's arm, twisted his weight to overbalance him, and gouged him with his claws. Reddish-black rents appeared in the fel orc's neck. Blood spurted. More fel orcs piled onto the druid, determined to bring him down.
Sarius rose, this time wearing the form of a bear, shifting the enormous weight of the fel orc warriors. Their blades hacked his fur, drawing blood, but magic surged around the druid to close his wounds. Maiev felt a hand on her shoulder. She turned her head to see Anyndra's appalled face. "We have got to get out of here!" her second-in-command bellowed. Her voice was already hoarse from shouting orders above the clamor of battle. Not many of Maiev's troops remained: a handful of her draenei and Broken fighters, and Anyndra and Sarius. The gates were fully open now. Fel orc after fel orc and naga after naga poured through. This was more than a force of bodyguards. It was an army. For a moment she considered flight. She could order her troops to run and fight another day, but she might never get another chance like this. She must kill the Betrayer this day. Even if it meant giving up her life and the lives of all her companions, it would be a price worth paying. A monstrous shadow fell on her. Looking up, she saw Illidan swoop overhead, his great wings spread. His eerie laughter echoed out over the battlefield, audible even over the ring of blade on blade, the war cries of the Broken, and the howls of the fel orcs. Magical energy surged around her as the blood elf and naga spellcasters returned to their interrupted ritual. Black spheres swirled above the battlefield. Long tentacles of darkness reached down and touched the wounded and the dying. Where they did so, the victims screamed and aged years in heartbeats, as if all their life force was being drawn out of them. Black sparks emerged from their bodies and were sucked upward into the unholy spheres. Maiev realized that their very souls were being devoured. Not even the souls of the dead were safe. When the tentacles touched a corpse, leather armor would grow tattered, chain mail and bright blades would tarnish and rust, and a spirit would come forth as black sparks to suffer the same fate as all the others. With every soul absorbed, the spheres grew larger and darker. Bolts of black lightning danced among them, forming great chains of energy. A shimmering hole appeared in the air over the altar, feeding on the souls of the fallen. Maiev looked around for Akama and saw him farther upslope, standing appalled as he watched the massive spell take effect. She hacked her way
toward him. Had he known about this trap? Anyndra fought calmly at her side. The massive bear that was Sarius lumbered along, dragging half a dozen screaming fel orcs with him. The druid bled from a score of cuts, his magic unable to compensate for all his wounds. Maiev looked on hundreds of corpses. Most of them were draenei; some of them were night elves or Broken. Far too few were fel orcs, naga, or blood elves. It came to Maiev that many of the dead were Ashtongue. Akama stood atop a boulder, shouting, "This slaughter was not part of the plan! You said we were supposed to capture Maiev!" So all of this had been a scheme concocted by Illidan and the treacherous Broken. The thought filled Maiev with rage. Magically amplified, Illidan's mad voice boomed over the battlefield. "Ah, we will capture Maiev, Akama. But there are other things that need to be done this day." He sounded truly demonic. Akama screamed and raised his fist. Chained lightning circled his fingers, and he looked for a moment as if he was considering hurling it at Illidan. Then he noticed how close Maiev was. He gestured. The air shimmered around him and he was gone. "Head for that rise!" Maiev shouted. "We will make our stand there." Anyndra nodded; then her eyes went wide with shock. An orcish blade protruded from her chest. Blood poured from her mouth. A muscular red arm went around her throat. There was a cracking sound and her neck broke. She fell forward. Sarius's roar of grief and rage vibrated through the air. It echoed through the chasms around them and just for a moment drowned out the thunder of the volcano. He hurled himself forward, shaking off the clutching fel orcs, and caught Anyndra's killer with his jaws. He reared up on his haunches and shook the slayer like a terrier would a rat. The fel orc's neck broke in turn. Spells burst around the huge bear. His movements slowed. Fel orc after fel orc struck him, drawing blood. More and more charged him. Even his strength had limits, and he was pulled down and hacked to pieces. Berserk fury overcame Maiev. She sprang into the midst of the fel orcs and chopped her way through them, slashing with her blade. She beheaded one, lopped away the arm of another, and opened the guts of a third. A red haze filled the air around her. Even the fel orcs grew afraid of her fury as she
built a mountain of corpses around herself. Then one of them, braver than the rest, threw himself back into the fray, and the army descended upon her. She chopped and chopped until her arm grew weary. She bled from a thousand cuts. She knew she was going to die, and if she could not get the Betrayer, she was going to drag as many of his henchmen down with her as she could. Blinded by weariness and the blood and sweat dripping down her face, she still lashed out. Her limbs felt like jelly. All strength was gone. She found herself standing alone in a circle of the dead. The fel orcs looked upon her with awe. She had killed scores of them, and it wasn't enough. It would never be enough. Overhead, black lightning flickered, moving from sphere to sphere as more of the souls of the dead and the dying were devoured. Maiev realized to her horror that all she had done was aid Illidan in the casting of his spell. It fed upon the souls of her victims and used the unleashed energy to crack a hole in the fabric of reality. It was growing cold now, and a wind howled in from the edge of infinity. Illidan hovered over the carnage, looking down in triumph, wings spread, an aura of evil power surrounding him. His gaze met Maiev's. He gestured. Dark energy descended from his fist like the spear of an angry god. Agony lanced through her. She stumbled and fell. The fel orcs advanced toward her recumbent body. She struggled to rise but strength failed her. She heard the beat of mighty wings and looked up to see Illidan staring down at her. A smile of hatred and malice twisted his narrow features. "So, Maiev, now you are my prisoner. I will endeavor to see that your captivity is as enjoyable as mine was." He turned his head and barked an order to the fel orcs. She pushed against the ground, attempting to rise and strike him. His fist fell like a sledgehammer, battering her to the earth once more. "I have business elsewhere," he said. "But something suitable has already been prepared for your future home. It is a cage that will hold even you, Warden."
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Three Months Before the Fall
AKAMA WATCHED THE PORTAL OPEN FROM AMID THE rocks high on the slopes of the Hand of Gul'dan. He had seen many gateways, but nothing like this one. It was not just the scale that was daunting. It was the sheer power. It had devoured the souls of hundreds, sucked in all the magical energy for leagues around. He could feel the unholy strength of it even from his vantage point on the cliffs. What was Illidan up to? He had told his council that this was all a trap for his foe. Knowing the Betrayer's hatred for Maiev, everyone had taken him at his word. Now it seemed that there were wheels within wheels, machinations within machinations. It looked as if the capture of Maiev had merely been a feint, intended to cover the unfolding of some greater scheme. Akama almost admired Illidan for it. He was capable of using even his own bitter hate as part of his plans. Anger surged within him. The Betrayer had broken his promise to spare the lives of Akama's people. Not only that, but he had harvested their souls. He pushed his fury down. He could ill afford such feelings, not after what had been done to his spirit. Akama wondered whether the unholy spell that had opened the portal could even affect him. As punishment for conspiring with Maiev, Illidan had drawn part of Akama's essence from his body. In the darkened hall of the refectory, he had subjected Akama's soul to unspeakable sorcery and turned a portion of it into a shade. His spirit, his most sacred possession, had been turned into a weapon against him, the instrument by which Illidan bound his will and, through him, his people. At his whim, the Betrayer could unleash the shade, and it would devour Akama from within. It would corrupt the rest of Akama's followers through the spiritual ties that bound them to him. It had
not been merely his own life that was at stake, but the lives and souls of all his people. Akama let out a long breath. The Betrayer had not believed his claim that he had been meeting Maiev merely to lure her into a trap, that he had wanted to present Illidan's ancient enemy as a gift to him. It was a story Akama had been prepared to give from the moment he made contact with the warden. He had repeated it to himself for so long that he had believed it. He had not convinced the Betrayer. Akama had been forced to deliver Maiev into Illidan's hands, and for that he was sorry. She had trusted him, and he had placed her into the clutches of her archenemy. Even now Illidan stood triumphant over his former captor. He did not look as if he intended to kill her. No. He had something else in mind. He had endured much at the hands of Maiev Shadowsong. She had become a focus for his rage and his hatred and his grievances. He would not grant her a quick death. Illidan's great spell shrieked to a climax. Akama felt the pain and the horror of the Broken and draenei souls as the portal spell devoured them. The split in reality gleamed like the surface of a lake on which oil had been thrown. The substance of the portal swirled and parted, and Akama caught glimpses of an alien landscape, of rocks floating in the sky and globules of solidified green energy moving through the air. It felt as if the land he was looking at was unimaginably far away. Judging by the amount of power used to open the portal, it connected to a world more distant than any Gul'dan had ever made contact with. He tried to work out what Illidan was up to. The army that had ambushed Maiev's force was drawing up around the gate to stand guard over it. Why? In case something comes through was the obvious answer. Even as that thought occurred to him, a new force emerged from the portals leading back to the temple. It consisted of scores of tattooed elven fighters. The army Illidan had been training was finally going to see action. Akama watched in fascination and horror. He sensed the power in the figures down there. They were mighty and they were touched with evil. In the light of the green gate, it was even more obvious, as if something about the portal fed whatever was in them and lent it strength. As he watched them move en masse under the Betrayer's gaze, the resemblance between these combatants and their master struck Akama as
never before. They were all like Illidan. They might have been his children. They were certainly his creation. He had forged them from flesh into something new. The question was why.
* * *
THE AIR AROUND VANDEL was rife with energy. It made his skin tingle and his head spin. The enormous portal ahead tempted him like food on a banquet table might tempt a starving elf. He could tell that his companions felt the same way. The area around the gate looked as if an ancient battle had taken place. Skeletons and desiccated bodies sprawled everywhere, encased in corroded armor, rusty weapons lying near at hand. If he had not known better, he would have thought this the site of some long-ago war. His spectral sight gave the lie to that. Here and there the wounded and the dying lay groaning. Tendrils of dark energy licked out from the portal and drew the shimmering souls from their bodies. They flew through the air, eyes wide, mouths open in horror, and disintegrated when they reached the hovering spheres. He knew without having to be told that they were being devoured by the magic here, and their energy was being used to power the spell. He glanced over his shoulder at the portals leading back to the Black Temple. It hardly seemed possible that barely an hour ago, he had risen from his pallet in his cell and prepared for another day of practice. He had known that something was going on. For days soldiers had been marshaled in the drill grounds of the temple, and an army had made ready for war. It had looked like another one of those vast military exercises that had been so common since he had joined the ranks of the Illidari. He had suspected it might have something to do with the groups of sorcerers who had left the temple in the previous days. Rumors had flown thick and fast. It had all seemed distant, though. For the demon hunters, there had only been the endless rounds of training, right up until the moment the horns had sounded, and Varedis had told them to assemble in the central courtyard with their weapons prepared. He had been surprised that there were few signs of active conflict when they emerged from the portals. The army they had seen gathering over the
previous few days was there, and it had fought. It had obviously suffered a number of casualties, too. The spell opening the gateway had not distinguished between those who had fought for Illidan and those who had fought for his enemies. It had sucked the souls out of them regardless of whose side they had been on. Perhaps it would have sucked the life out of him if he had been wounded. He had most likely stumbled on the reason why he and his comrades had been deployed last. It was clear that whatever their purpose was, it had nothing to do with the battle here. Their lives were being preserved for something else. Looking at the yawning portal, flickering and shimmering ahead of him, he knew what that purpose was. Through the gateway, as it swirled, he caught the psychic traces of fel energy and demons. It was like standing some distance from a kitchen on a windy day and catching the scent of food cooking within it. The stench of demon buffeted his nostrils. When he licked his lips, he tasted a faint residue of fel magic. The gate was the mightiest spellwork he had ever seen. His new senses let him appreciate it as he never could have before. The part of him that had wandered the woods of Ashenvale hated it. He knew his family and neighbors would have, too. The part that had devoured demons and followed Illidan appreciated it for what it was. He touched the amulet he had made for Khariel and checked his runeworked weapons. He was as ready now as he was ever going to be. Soon. Soon, whispered the voice within him that was not his own.
* * *
ILLIDAN TURNED MAIEV'S ARMORED form over with the tip of his hoof. She was skilled and powerful, of that there was no doubt. Looking at the carnage she had wrought among his forces, he had almost been tempted to take a hand in the fight himself. He had feared that she might break free and escape once more into the tortured landscape of Shadowmoon Valley. He was glad now he had decided to deploy an entire army to watch over the gate. It had proved necessary before the way was opened. She had almost succeeded in distracting him at the crucial moment of the ritual, when he had needed all his concentration to finish the weaving of energies and bring the construction to fruition.
Almost. No matter. Maiev was his prisoner now and she would never trouble him again. He allowed himself a smirk of satisfaction. It was a good omen, he thought. A portent of how this day would go. Whatever powers still watched over these ancient worlds looked favorably on his actions. Do not be too confident, he told himself. We make order from chaos by the force of our wills. It is foolish to read anything more into the patterns random chance throws up. He took one last, lingering glance at Maiev and promised himself that she would suffer as he had. Ten thousand years of pain would not be too many for her to endure. She would not live for another ten millennia, so he would need to find a way to concentrate all that agony into a much shorter span. There would be time enough to consider such things later. The portal shimmered and pulsed. Raising his hands wide, he spoke the final words of the great spell. The knots of energy tied themselves. The structure stabilized. The shimmering curtain parted, and the way to Nathreza, the homeworld of the dreadlords, was clear. A dagger of pure force sliced reality around the gate. Through it washed a torrent of fel energy. His tattoos channeled and absorbed it, filling him with ever greater power. His satisfaction with this achievement exceeded even what he felt with Maiev's capture. He had created a gate to a world farther away than any other reached from the surface of Outland. Gul'dan himself would have struggled to invoke it and contain its energies. This portal was the greatest feat of sorcery worked in Outland since its catastrophic creation. An eerie green light bathed the upturned faces of his followers, making them look even more monstrous than usual. They were a weapon he had spent a long time forging. He wondered whether they would survive the first battle or shatter like a flawed blade created by a neophyte smith. They had been gifted with power, trained by masters. They had been selected from the most driven individuals with the greatest thirst for vengeance against the Burning Legion. They had survived when most others would have died. That itself meant nothing. They could still perish in the next few hours. He could still die. His whole life could be turned into an empty cosmic joke by the whims of chance. It was too late to worry about such things now. He would need to trust that his calculations were correct and that his schemes would work out as he had planned them.
He raised his hand into the air, flexed his wings, and soared above his troops. All gazes went from the gateway to him, just as he intended. He set himself down by the open portal, felt the tingle of magic around him, caught the scent of alien air. He gestured for his demon hunters to follow, and then he swooped through the portal to confront his onrushing destiny.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN Three Months Before the Fall
VANDEL BOUNDED THROUGH THE GATEWAY, FOLLOWING Illidan. He raced to the brow of the ridge and crouched down, doing his best to keep out of sight. In the distance he sensed demons, thousands upon thousands of them. Huge islands of rock drifted like clouds across the sky of this alien world. Green light burned from every boulder and blazed from the tiny orbiting sun. Beneath him, the ridge fell away to a cratered plain over which obelisks of reflective obsidian hovered. The portal back to Outland gaped, a hole in the fabric of reality, linking two worlds. Illidan's shadow fell upon him. The Betrayer stood on the crest of the hill, claws extended, every muscle in his tattoo-covered body tight with tension. Massive batwings cloaked his shoulders. Bestial horns curved from the sides of his head. A circlet of runecloth hid his eye sockets. A savage smile of anticipation curled his thin lips, revealing his bright fangs. He, too, sensed the approaching demons. Part of Vandel tittered with mad mirth. He forced the demonic presence down, knowing that he could not hold it there for long. He was going to need its strength to survive the coming battle. Illidan's leathery wings creaked as he shifted his weight. His hooves struck sparks against the rocks as he moved. Nearby, scores of Illidari demon hunters waited in the shadows, hidden by potent magic. Vandel prayed to whatever gods might be listening that those spells were strong enough. Out there in the darkness, enemies of terrible power waited. Within the next few hours, they would find out whether the gifts the Betrayer had lavished on them were enough to preserve their lives. They
would learn whether their months of harsh training and terrible sacrifices had paid off. And still, something in Vandel yearned to serve the forces of the Dark Titan, Sargeras, and he feared it was not just the part that was transformed by his demon's touch. A fragment of his elven soul responded to the nihilistic glory of the Burning Legion just as strongly as any infernal would. Illidan's nostrils flared as if he scented Vandel's weakness. A growl sounded deep in his throat. He will fail, Vandel's inner demon whispered. He has always failed. He cannot oppose the will of Sargeras. Nothing can. Vandel took a deep breath and tried to empty his mind. It did not help. It just made him more aware of the magical energy surging around him. He wanted to gather it to him and use it. He wanted to unleash a volcanic tide of destruction upon the distant demonic presences. He wanted to slay them and take their essence into himself. He wanted to feed. Yes, the demon whispered. That will make you strong enough to challenge even Illidan. He concentrated on his surroundings in an effort to ignore the mad whispers. This planetoid was carved from pure magical energy congealed into pulsing, chromatic stone. Whenever he touched the surrounding rocks his flesh tingled. His heart thundered in his chest. He tried to focus his concentration on the approaching enemy. He told himself that he was ready for this.
* * *
ILLIDAN STUDIED THE DISTANT demons. At the moment, they were merely remote shadows thrown upon his mind by their auras of power. Their numbers dwarfed those of his own force. It did not matter. Magic would decide this battle. Fel energy swirled around him. He resisted the temptation to reach out and draw upon it. He ran his hand over the wound that Arthas had given him. It tingled as if some small part of the Lich King's evil blade, Frostmourne, were still lodged in it. He moved his fingers away to avoid being reminded of his previous defeats. Now was not the time to dwell on such things.
Illidan sensed the nervousness of his troops, felt their inner battles. His smile became a snarl. His followers were like hounds sensing prey. He had shaped them to be so. Now was the ultimate test. Now he would find out whether all the centuries of planning had paid off. If this force failed him, he would die, and all his millennia-long designs would come to naught. That was not going to happen. They were not going to fail at this last hurdle. He had schemed too long to let that happen. He expanded his awareness. The wave front of his magically extended senses swept over the approaching enemy. Within a heartbeat he had counted their numbers. There were scores of dreadlords, all with their own retinues of hundreds of felhounds and infernals and every other manner of demonic creature. They are strong. Perhaps too strong. The thought nagged at him. He shook his horned head. He flexed his wings and caught the updraft of air sweeping the cliffside. You have miscalculated. And not for the first time. No. He could not be wrong. He was ready. His force was ready. The enemy was almost upon them. The demonic army flowed across the alien landscape, an unstoppable tide intent on swamping the ridge on which Illidan waited. The huge dreadlords stalked amid their companies of lesser demons. Their enormous batwings fluttered even though there was no wind. Their horned heads turned as they surveyed their surroundings for foes. The glowing runes on their armor marked their status as much as the size of their retinues did. Evilly beautiful succubi cracked whips and flexed tails and danced lasciviously. Scuttling felhounds sniffed the air as if they sought prey, sensor stalks twitching, shark teeth gleaming. Armored felguard brandished huge axes as they awaited orders from their commanders. Towering, six-armed shivarra shimmered on the edge of Illidan's perception, near invisible even to his keen senses. These were soldiers of the Burning Legion, the force that had devoured worlds beyond number. They were intent on reducing the entire cosmos to smoldering ashes in the name of their master, Sargeras. Illidan stood apparently alone. His force remained concealed. It would be revealed when he was ready and not before. The gate he had opened on the surface of this barren world drew his enemies. They had come to punish
whoever dared transgress upon their realm. It was not often anyone carried the fight within the borders of the Burning Legion. In all his long lifetime, Illidan could not think of more than a handful of such events. The army came to a halt on the plain below. The greatest of the dreadlords raised a clenched fist, then pointed at Illidan and laughed. His evil mirth echoed across the landscape and was echoed from the throats of hundreds of other dreadlords. Their mockery was obvious. Some of them might have thought the joke was upon them. They had mobilized an army to confront this single figure. Illidan crossed his arms over his chest and flexed his wings to their greatest extent. He glared down upon his enemies, mirroring their contempt. The mirth of the dreadlords guttered in their throats. It ceased to resound among the rocks. Quiet fell upon the ranks of the huge army. Only the sputtering of the molten skins of the infernals broke the silence. The leader of the dreadlords swept down his raised fist. A gigantic meteor dropped from the sky. A thunderclap boomed. The sound echoed over the site of the coming battle and made the air vibrate.
* * *
VANDEL WAS GLAD TO be in the cover of the rocks. So far none of the demons had noticed him. He felt their malice rolling toward him, a fog of unleashed hatred and evil that somehow congealed out of the magic in the air. Join them, the demon voice whispered inside him. Join them and you will be rewarded as no soul in the history of the cosmos has been rewarded. He felt the temptation. The demon was telling the truth as it understood it. He touched the hilts of his rune-encrusted blades. It would be the simplest of actions to plunge them into Illidan's back. Was he not the Betrayer? Had ever an elf in history been more deserving of death? Slay him, his demon whispered. Slay Illidan and achieve eternal glory. Slay the Betrayer and become a dark god. The sound of the thunderclap faded as the army of the nathrezim advanced. The great meteor hit the ground, shaking the earth, disgorging a gigantic blazing infernal. It pulled itself out of the impact crater and lumbered forward along with the rest of the dreadlords' army.
Vandel felt the temptation rise within him. If he slaughtered Illidan, he would be welcomed by his demonic kindred. He could put his mortality behind him forever, live untroubled by fear and regret. He could bury all traces of guilt about failing his family, all remorse, any semblance of kinship with these weak, frail creatures of flesh and blood. He could transcend what he was, join the Burning Legion, and become a conqueror, cleansing the universe of the foul disease of life. He could help bring creation crashing down so that a new universe could be born, one shaped in his image, by his desires. For a moment, he wavered. He listened to the voice of his inner demon and realized that it was his own. His soul had been tainted when he devoured the felhound. It had absorbed the demon's evil and been twisted. There was really no other demon than himself. To give in to the voice of temptation would be to forswear his quest for vengeance and break faith with his dead wife and child. He did not want to kill Illidan. He wanted to kill the things that had made Illidan into what he was. He understood now as he never had before what the Betrayer stood for, because of what he stood against. For all his gigantic flaws, Illidan was the only being who really grasped what they fought, and he was prepared to do whatever it took to end the threat. He might well be mad. His schemes might well be doomed to failure. But he was better than the alternative. The demons of the Legion advanced toward the ridge. It was time to do battle with the real enemy. The army of the nathrezim moved upslope. A mortal force would have been slowed by the effort, but they seemed tireless. Felhounds loped ahead, infernals lumbered in their wake, scores of gigantic winged dreadlords bellowed orders to their followers. Now. The thunderous voice spoke within Vandel's head, and it was Illidan's. As one the demon hunters emerged from their cover and raced down toward their prey. For a moment, the Legion's army slowed, as if unable to comprehend the fact that it was being attacked by this much smaller force of smaller beings. One or two of the dreadlords laughed again. With a roar like the ocean throwing itself against rocks, the two armies collided. The demons wanted to reach the portal and close it. The demon
hunters wanted only to slay and slay and slay. A felhound leapt at Vandel. Sharklike teeth gaped. He invoked his power and sent a bolt of greenish-yellow energy into its maw. The demon's head exploded. Chunks of flesh fell to the ground, charred and smoking. Resisting the temptation to feast, Vandel launched himself forward, daggers clearing their sheaths. He rolled between two monstrous mo'arg servitors, hamstrung them before they could bring their weapons to bear, flipped to his feet, and smashed his dagger through the eye socket of first one, then the other. A moment later, he confronted a dreadlord. The creature loomed over him, twice his height, broader than an ogre and even stronger. The dreadlord brought a massive spiked mace smashing into the ground as Vandel jumped aside. Rock splintered. Clouds of green dust rose glittering into the air. Vandel picked himself up. His foe buffeted him with a batlike wing. The force of the blow made his head ring, sent him hurtling back toward a massive boulder. He flipped himself over so that his feet made contact with the rock first, and then he sprang forward, bouncing away from the impact and rolling to a stand. The dreadlord turned with surprising quickness for a creature of his enormous bulk and lumbered toward him. Vandel raised his hand and sent a fel bolt slashing toward the demon. A wing curled around his opponent's body. The bolt ripped through the appendage, leaving it hanging like a tattered cloak from the dreadlord's side. The monster did not even seem to have slowed. From the periphery of his vision, Vandel saw Cyana dispatch another mo'arg servitor, then leap over the corpse to engage a felguard. A blaze of light from his right warned him, and he sprang into the air just as an imp's firebolt passed beneath him. He twisted to avoid descending into the jet of flame and found himself looking up at the massive polished hoof of the wounded dreadlord. It stamped down, missing him. He lashed out with his dagger, catching his opponent behind the knee and drawing forth what might have been a grunt of pain or contempt. The creature smashed down with his mace and caught Vandel on the shoulder. When he had been mortal, the blow would have killed him, smashing broken ribs through heart and lung. He rolled with the impact, riding the force of the strike. As he did so, he repaid the imp who had blasted him,
hitting the demon with a fel bolt that turned the cackling little monster into a pool of bubbling slime. Vandel sprang upward, embedding his left-hand dagger in the dreadlord's breastplate, using it to pull himself up until he could drive his other weapon through the demon's eye. The creature clutched at the socket, attempting to swat him, but Vandel had already drawn the blade clear and driven it through the other eye. He dropped to the ground and unleashed a flurry of blows on the blinded monster. Doubtless the demon could, given time, sense Vandel the way he sensed him, using magic, but for those few crucial instants the creature might as well have been blind. Vandel took advantage to stab his blades again and again into the dreadlord. The magic on the daggers cut his flesh, leaving rotting wounds that would not heal. Blades grated on bone, sawed through tendon, parted muscle with the sound of a butcher's cleaver going into a steer's carcass. The demon gave up trying to strike him and tried to lumber away, flapping his huge wings. Because of the earlier damage, he could only remain on the ground while Vandel carved him to pieces. Cruelty drove Vandel's hand. Every blow that went home gave him sick satisfaction, and he knew the thing within him was feeding on the dreadlord's death. At that moment he no longer cared. The demon's desires were aligned with his own. It did not matter if he made it stronger. Right now he could use its strength, and right now, he knew that it took just as much satisfaction from the killing as he did. When finally he had reduced the dreadlord to a pile of skinned flesh, it occurred to him that he had wasted valuable time. There was more prey to be had, and he needed to claim his share. Needle sat nearby, astride the torso of a fallen felguard, casually punching his foot-long needles again and again into the demon's open chest plate as if he were trying to stitch it together. Elarisiel chased a felhound around a rock before putting it out of its misery. Over by a huge boulder, a group of dreadlords made a last stand. They looked more bemused than afraid, as if they could not quite grasp what was happening around them. It was clear that the battle had not gone as they had expected. The demon hunters had gone through their army like a sharp scythe
through wheat. Everywhere the corpses of demons sprawled. There were several elf bodies, too, but far fewer than Vandel would have expected, given the sizes of the respective forces. Illidan landed atop the rock behind the remaining dreadlords. Vandel wondered whether the lord of Outland intended to take a hand in their destruction, but he simply stood there, watching. The demon hunters slowly rose from what they were doing and stared at their overlord and then at the dreadlords. The demons braced themselves as a tide of fighters surged forward and engulfed them.
* * *
ILLIDAN WATCHED HIS FORCES drag down the last of the nathrezim. His doubts had disappeared. The demon hunters had exceeded his expectations. Of course, they had possessed the advantage of surprise. The dreadlords had not expected to encounter such savage power so close to their home, and overconfidently had marched to meet them. Things would not always be so easy. Nonetheless, nothing could damp the sweet feeling of triumph. Every dreadlord who fell here would be one who no longer troubled the universe. In this place, at this time, they would die permanently. How long had it taken Illidan to realize that secret? How many times had he fruitlessly thought he had slain his enemies? His visions had shown him the answer. During his millennia-long imprisonment, he could do nothing with them, but now things had changed. He would make the lords of the Burning Legion suffer as they had made others suffer. He counted his own dead. Less than a score. At this point each was a loss he could barely afford, but soon there would be more demon hunters. The Legion had sown dragon's teeth among his people. There was no shortage of those who sought vengeance against the demons. But that was a problem for another day. Now he had to get what he had come here for. Time was of the essence. The force they had encountered was the tiniest fraction of the tiniest fraction of what the Burning Legion could deploy. As soon as they realized what had happened, the masters of the city would summon aid. He needed to be gone from here before that occurred. No matter
how powerful his individual fighters were, they could still be overcome by enough enemies. He gave the signal to advance. The demon hunters moved quickly through the nathrezim city. Great obsidian towers reflected the green light of fel magic all around them. Streets of shining black shimmered in their glow. More and more demons surrounded them, stragglers or those left behind by the army to hold important posts. The Illidari overwhelmed any they encountered, like hounds pulling down a rabbit. Not even the mightiest dreadlord was a match for so many. Illidan resisted the urge to join in the fray. Opening the portal had drained a good deal of his power; he was husbanding what was left in case any unexpected threat emerged. Ahead of him loomed the tallest tower, the great archive of the dreadlords. Within this building lay all the countless secrets the nathrezim had obtained during their service to Sargeras. Hulking felguard flanked an entrance that shimmered and vanished, closing off the tower to intruders. Tattooed fighters dragged the demons down, then stood before where the doorway once was, baffled. What had been an empty archway mere heartbeats before was now a wall of stone. "Blast it," Illidan ordered. There was no doubt an easier way of opening the doorway, but he did not have time to uncover the magical key. The demon hunters raised their hands and sent fel flame licking toward the barrier. Hundreds of bolts smashed, scoured, and scratched the stone, but still it withstood the assault. "Concentrate on one area!" Illidan shouted, and all the bolts converged at the center of the stone, drilling through it until finally the rock splintered and collapsed into a heap of rubble. Illidan sprang over it and glimpsed a long ramp leading down into the depths below the tower. So far all was as he recalled from his memories of Gul'dan's visions. He smiled to himself as a score of Illidari sprang over the stones and fanned out into the interior of the building, scouting the way ahead. "Down," Illidan ordered them, and they took the ramp leading down. Strange lights moved in the floor, as if triggered by their steps. The air pulsed with sorcery, currents of energy woven into potent spells by the magic of the
nathrezim. Power shimmered in the air and thrummed beneath his hooves. Complex engines of magic all around drew on the energy that permeated everything on this strange world. He was close now. So close.
CHAPTER NINETEEN Three Months Before the Fall
"DIE, DESECRATOR!" THE MO'ARG SERVITOR shouted as he sprang forward to attack. The demon raised the barrel of his odd weapon. Magical flame sputtered. Illidan decapitated the squat, armored creature with a casual backhand stroke of his warglaive as he entered the central archive of the dreadlords. Over everything loomed glittering towers built of countless obsidian disks layered together like stacks of coins. Each one of those disks was a record. One of them was what he sought. He turned to the demon hunters who stood in the entrance of the huge chamber, waiting his command. "Do not enter. Hold this doorway, no matter what happens in the next five minutes." They nodded acquiescence, and Illidan turned once more to face the stacks. He crossed his arms on his chest and wove a spell. Tendrils of magic flashed from his hands to the towers of stacked disks. As they connected, he caught flashes of imagery, splinters of knowledge. This was the monument of the dreadlords, the heart of their world. It recorded every triumph, every conquest, and every plot. Nathrezim schemed to have their names imprinted here. It was the living memory of their race. Here were records of innumerable campaigns fought on countless worlds. Here were the names of long-forgotten traitors who had betrayed their homes to the Legion and were in turn betrayed by the demons. Here was knowledge of every portal the Legion had ever passed through, the names and locations of every world it had ever burned. There was a system to it. It was organized almost chronologically, the oldest disks on the bottom of each stack. The stacks closest to the center were the oldest of these.
Illidan sent tendrils of energy racing to the middle. What he wanted would be located very near the core. The images that flashed into his mind reeked of age. He was looking at things that were old even as demons reckoned time. A sense of urgency pushed at him. Somewhere in the distance, gates were opening. The nathrezim were responding to the invasion of their homeworld. He became aware of the sounds of fighting. They came from what seemed like a great distance, but he knew this was because of the spell linking him to the archive. His forces were engaged with enemy reinforcements flooding in from the city above. He prayed they could hold them until his work was completed. He needed to finish quickly, or this library would become a trap and his army would be overwhelmed by the massed strength of the nathrezim. He took a deep breath and slowed his pulse. It would not do to make a mistake here, so close to the culmination of everything he had planned for. He could not afford to fail. There-he found the first ward, a complex spell, almost undetectable. It had been set to warn of anyone tampering with these records and rewriting history. He was not concerned with any such subtlety. He just needed the specific record he was searching for, and then he would be gone. He smashed the spell aside and felt an immediate response as defensive runes flared to life. He sensed portals opening around him. An enormous felguard shimmered into being among the stacks. A pulse of magical energy, loud as thunder and clear as a bell to anyone with the senses to hear it, rang out. From the distance came multiple responses. The nathrezim would know exactly where he was now. He stepped forward as the felguard aimed a blow at him. His warglaive lashed out and cut the demon in half. More felguard materialized around him. Illidan cut them down, but more and more materialized with every heartbeat. He gazed around him with his spectral sight, looking for the pattern of the defenses, finding them inscribed around the base of each pillar of disks. Each was connected to one of three master sigils around the central pillar. He aimed one of his warglaives at the nearest and threw. His weapon whirled through the air and scoured the stone, breaking part of the spell. The blade bounced off the pillar and returned to his hand. The onrush of felguard slackened as the portals connected to the destroyed rune collapsed. Illidan sprang forward, moving around the pillar as the demons pursued
him. Ahead lay another glowing sigil in the floor. He cut down two felguard, slid forward, powering himself with his wings, and defaced the rune with his blades, then moved toward the last of the master wards. The remaining felguard bunched around the third glowing sigil. He sprang into the air, gained height, and swooped down on them. His blades sang as he chopped through the demonic ranks, ducking their axe strokes, evading their attempts to grip him. He drove his blade right into the center of the runic pattern, disrupting it. A massive backwash of energy pushed him into the air. The demons howled their frustration, but the gateways through which they had come collapsed. Now he had to deal with only those who had already passed through. There would be no more reinforcements. Once more he dived amid the demons, scattering them with the force of his flying charge. His blades decapitated some and left others limbless. He came to rest beside the central pillar. He stood next to his goal for all these long centuries. Extending one hand, he invoked his spell of seeking once more. Images flooded his mind as tendrils of force touched the disks. One in particular, the Seal of Argus, drew him. Potent images overlaid it, the aura of beings he had encountered in the past and would never forget: Archimonde and Kil'jaeden, the two mightiest lieutenants of Sargeras, true master of the Burning Legion. Their psychic stench was so strong, it threatened to overwhelm even his prepared mind. He felt the brutal fury of Archimonde and the subtle, intricate mind of Kil'jaeden. Even though he knew they were not present, it was all he could do to keep from lashing out as if surrounded by deadly foes. With a mighty heave of his muscles, he tore the disk from the tower. The stack tottered but did not fall. He spoke the words of another spell, and the disk floated in the air behind him, slowly orbiting his form, the runes on its surface glowing with sinister greenish-yellow light. A grim smile twisted Illidan's lips. He would give the nathrezim something to remember him by. He drew on all his strength and scoured the tower of records with one of the Warglaives of Azzinoth. The smell of ozone and brimstone filled the air as sparks of magical energy discharged. Rising into the air, Illidan defaced the pillars, damaging the weaving of spells, smashing the records of which the dreadlords were so proud. Demonic glee pulsed through his mind at the thought of their fury. Part of him
mourned the loss of so much knowledge. Part of him believed that no record of the dreadlords should be allowed to remain. They deserved no monument. From the entrance came the sounds of fighting as his demon hunters sought to keep their resurgent enemy at bay. He swooped down into the combat, landed on the back of one dreadlord, and parted the demon's head from his shoulders with a single blow. "To me, my soldiers!" he shouted. "It is time to leave this foul place. We have gotten what we came for."
* * *
THEY BATTLED THEIR WAY back to the portal. All around, Illidan sensed the opening of more gateways as the hosts of the Burning Legion poured reinforcements in. It seemed they had not yet realized what was happening, and were responding piecemeal. Sometime soon a leader would take charge, and then things would become difficult. They needed to leave this world before that happened. Vandel slashed at a demonic mo'arg servitor as the creature aimed a blast of flame from some engine he wore on his back. Companies of imps poured fire down on them from on high. They occupied the ridgelines. "Varedis, take a company and clear those ridges," Illidan ordered. The demon hunter nodded and gestured, and he and his forces bounded up the hillside, cartwheeling and somersaulting through the gouts of flame. The demons shrieked and gibbered foul insults in their tongue and then turned to flee. Ahead loomed a pack of voidwalkers, floating over the battlefield, legless, armored, and gleaming black. They were tough but slow. "Go around them," Illidan ordered. "Make your way to the portal." He paused to glance around. His force had taken casualties during the battle in the archive, and even now attrition stalked them. He saw Elarisiel go down and hacked his way to her side. Vandel was already there, helping her to her feet. Illidan nodded his approval. He wanted no one left behind if possible. The wounded could be healed. Those too wounded to be moved he put out of their misery.
Ahead of them the portal to Outland blazed. There were signs of conflict there. The Legion's forces had moved to secure the gate, intending to cut off their retreat. In accordance with his orders, his own army on Outland had not moved through but remained in place to guard the way out. "Form up into a wedge," he ordered. "We are going to cut our way free." His demon hunters shouted their approval and charged. In battle they looked every bit as demonic as their foes-lithe tattooed forms marked by scars and mutations, some surrounded by integuments of shadow, some wielding fel magic as easily as any spawn of the Twisting Nether. For a moment, the demons held. Then they were down and the portal was ahead of Illidan's forces. He ordered them through and then turned. In the distance, the glare of gigantic gateways opening filled the darkness. Over the ridges poured demonic fighter after demonic fighter. He looked at them and laughed. Let them come. He had found what he was looking for. They were too late to stop him. He stepped through the portal. Already the demon hunters were racing clear of it to join the rest of his army on Outland. Illidan took one last look at the battleground in Nathreza, sensed none of his troops alive out there, and spoke the words of unbinding. The gateway unraveled in a furious discharge of energy, all the backblast directed into the nathrezim homeworld. It was his final gift to them, a surge of explosive energy that could tear apart a continent. He prayed that on the other side of the gate, the dreadlord commanders were assembled. He had inflicted the greatest defeat that the Burning Legion had suffered in millennia, and he was pleased.
* * *
ILLIDAN WATCHED THE LAST remnants of the portal's energies collapse behind him. He looked at his army and wondered if there were any spies among it. Almost certainly it was the case. He considered the events of the day, and his mouth twisted into a wide grin. Today had been the first unalloyed triumph he had experienced in many a long century. He had captured Maiev. He had invaded the realm of the dreadlords and acquired their most closely kept secret. He had destroyed the
armies they had sent to protect their homeworld. If his calculations were correct, he had shattered Nathreza as Ner'zhul's magic had shattered Draenor. He gazed upon the watchful, expectant faces of his troops. His magically amplified voice boomed out over the ranks of assembled fighters. "Today we have struck a blow against the Burning Legion the like of which has not been felt in ten thousand years. We have slaughtered dreadlords and ravaged their world. We have shown them that they are not immune to our vengeance. That they will be brought to justice and made to atone for their deeds." Approval rippled through the ranks of the demon hunters as the realization of what they had done settled into their minds. They had been concentrating only on fighting and survival. Now they began to feel their triumph in their bones. Smiles appeared on faces whose owners had never expected to smile again. For a moment demonic rage vanished, to be replaced with something almost like calm. "We have slain thousands and lured their armies into a trap that killed a hundred times that number, and we have this!" He brandished the disk he had taken from the archives, held it aloft with both hands so that it caught the light and sparkled. The demon hunters and the sorcerers present could all see the power it contained. The sensitive among them could catch a faint whiff of the auras permeating it, even at the distance they stood from him. There might be spies present, he told himself, but glee loosened his tongue. "We have found the key to the homeworld of Kil'jaeden and Archimonde, to a place where the Legion's commanders can be finally slain. We have uncovered the location of Argus. "The Legion has destroyed world after world, enslaved and massacred nation after nation. Now it will reap what it has sown. Today we have slaughtered the nathrezim, and that is only the first step. Today we put our feet on the path to ultimate victory. Today we found the means to cut off the head that guides our foe. We are taking the war to Kil'jaeden. We are going to teach him the meaning of defeat." Let there be spies present, Illidan thought. Let them report that to the Burning Legion. Let them think about what I have done this day and tremble.
CHAPTER TWENTY Three Months Before the Fall
MAIEV WOKE. SHE ACHED AS SHE HAD EVERY one of the days since she had found herself in this place. She was somewhere deep underground. Nearby she could hear water drip. The air held the brimstone taint of demons, and the unwashed smell of Broken. She rose to her feet and tested the bars of her cage once more. They had not become any weaker since the previous day. They had been forged to hold something with the power of a pit lord, and then they had been reinforced with layers of runes and spells. She inspected the runes about her. There were spells of nourishment and restoration. She could not starve herself to death. Any wounds she inflicted on her own body were healed as swiftly as she might make them. She well knew this type of spell. It was similar to the ones used to imprison Illidan. She had discovered this when she had attempted to batter her way out with her bare hands. She had struck the blows in impatient fury, the pain goading her on even as her bones healed, knitting back together as quickly as her flesh had rent. She suspected that the spells would bring her back from death if she found some way of killing herself. Her spirit was bound here. There was no way to set it free unless her captors willed it. At first she had expected the Betrayer to appear at any moment to begin tormenting her, but he had not done so. He was too busy to claim his vengeance, or more likely he was just allowing her horror to mount in anticipation of his arrival. He was certainly capable of such mental cruelty. There had been no shortage of petty torments from her guards. She had been spat upon, poked with sharp sticks, and given food in which the Ashtongue had urinated. Demons had mocked her with words that flayed like
knives. A spectacularly arrogant dreadlord named Vagath had explained in great detail exactly what tortures he was going to inflict on her when the order came. She had endured all the slights with calm, unwilling to give her tormentors any satisfaction. So far it seemed they had been ordered against any worse abuse by Illidan himself. He wanted no one taking vengeance before he did. There were other torments. Hot days on which she went without water. Days when she had been given no food and her stomach had growled like an angry nightsaber. The spells kept her going, would not allow her to die, but they did not relieve her from thirst or hunger. And she inflicted worse torments on herself. She had led those who had trusted her to their doom. In seeking her vengeance on Illidan, she had caused the deaths of Anyndra and Sarius and all the others who had placed their faith in her leadership. She told herself they had done so voluntarily, but it did not help. When she lay awake, she could see their faces, and they gave her looks full of reproach. In her dreams she saw them die again and again. She cursed all of those who had refused to help: the naaru, the Aldor, Arechron in Telaar. If they had listened to her, none of this would have happened, and the Betrayer would be where he deserved to be, imprisoned once more or in his grave. It gave her no relief. She knew whose will it was that had driven the crusade against the Betrayer. She knew whom the others had put their faith in. She had let them down. She could try to blame whomever she liked, but at the end of the day, she had to take responsibility for her own failure. Perhaps that was the worst injury of all. She had failed. Illidan was not only free but stronger than he had ever been. It galled her worse than poison, worse than hunger, worse than torture. Illidan was free and there was nothing she could do about it. She was doomed to stay in this cage, helpless, until he chose to take her life. It was being made clear to her that she lived or died entirely at his whim. Now he was ignoring her, letting her know how insignificant she was in the great scheme of things. There were times when she hoped that some of her force had escaped and would come free her, and there were times when she despaired of it. Even if a few had made it clear of the ambush, why would they come back for the
leader who had led their comrades to their deaths? She had filled their heads with tales of victory and glory, and their reward had been defeat. She knew, though, that no one was coming. All her troops were dead. She had seen them fall. She cursed Akama once more. She had believed in the faithless leader of the Ashtongue faction. He had convinced her that he hated Illidan as much as she did, and that he had as much reason to want the Betrayer's downfall. How he must be laughing now, at the way he had deceived her, at the way in which she had believed his lies. She cursed the memory of their every meeting. When had the betrayal started and why had she not spotted it? Had he planned this from the beginning, back when they first met in Orebor Harborage? Even then were he and Illidan laughing at the way she was being led to her doom? She refused to believe that she could be so easily gulled. Akama must have meant some of what he said. His resentment of what the Betrayer had done to the Temple of Karabor was real enough. Looking back, she could see there was a moment when he had changed. At their last meeting in Orebor Harborage, he had seemed even more aged, weaker, and listless. Perhaps he had been finally unmasked, captured, tortured. Perhaps Illidan had used some powerful binding spell on him. Or perhaps Illidan had simply made him a better offer, promised him something his venal soul could not resist. The Betrayer could be persuasive and cloak his malice in honeyed words. What could he possibly have offered the Broken? No. Unless she was much mistaken, Akama had been as surprised as she was at what had happened during the opening of the gate. He had spoken out against the ritual destruction of the Broken's souls even at risk to his own life. Things were not quite as simple as she feared in the depths of her despair. It took her moments to realize that her guards had gone silent. Looking up, she saw why. Limping toward her, looking older and more tired than ever, was Akama. "Treacherous oath-breaking dog," she said as soon as the Broken was within earshot. "I swore no oaths to you, Maiev Shadowsong," he said, his voice weary. "Nor you to me."
The guards listened intently. Akama gestured for them to stand back as he approached the cage. They did so, clearly daunted by his presence. "So you have managed to worm your way back into the Betrayer's favor." "I am alive." "That is more than many of your people can claim." Akama winced and said, "Or yours." Maiev kept her guilt from her face. "They died for the cause of bringing Illidan to justice. As I will." Akama gestured at the cage. His magic made the wards and spells shimmer in the air, visible. "Look at where all your passion, hatred, and anger have brought you. Do you enjoy the view?" "At least I did not stand by and watch my own people being slaughtered." Akama considered his words for a moment and then said, "But slaughtered they were. Because of where you led them." It was Maiev's turn to flinch. She could not control her movements perfectly. Imprisonment was affecting her. "They gave their lives for what they believed in. Will anyone ever be able to say the same of you?" "I was given a hard choice. I will live with it. You of all people should know how that is." "You chose to spare your own life and give away the lives of those who trusted you." Maiev could not keep the bitterness from her voice. "You have no idea what was done to me. Illidan ripped part of my soul from my body and bound it with magic. If he chooses to, he can unleash it, and it will devour me." Maiev wondered if that was true. If it was, it would explain much. Perhaps it was just another lie. "I do not need to hear your self-pity." Akama remained silent for many heartbeats. When he spoke, his voice was gentle. "It was not just my life that was at risk. All of my people's lives were as well. The Betrayer is as ruthless as he is powerful." "So you chose to throw away our chance of overthrowing him." "We never had a chance, not then." "So you think you have a better chance now?" Akama paused. His mouth opened. He seemed to be on the verge of saying something; then he licked his lips and shook his head almost imperceptibly. "You have no conception of how strong Illidan has become. I
saw him work sorcery that I would not have believed possible for anyone less than a god. He opened a portal clear across the cosmos." Maiev thought she detected an off note in Akama's voice. He was afraid of being overheard. Were they being watched? She would have to assume that they were. Was it possible he still schemed against the Betrayer and somehow believed that she had a place in those schemes? "And why do you think he did this?" "He has returned, having slaughtered an army of demons, perhaps killed a world full of them. So he claimed when he came back through the portal." "And you believe him?" "I believe that Illidan truly hates the nathrezim, that he hates all of the Burning Legion." Did she hear doubt in his voice? Was Akama merely an actor mouthing a script in order to avoid having suspicion fall on him? "Why are you here? Did you come to gloat?" "I am here to make sure you are well. Lord Illidan wants to be certain of that. He has plans for you." Maiev's mouth went dry and her heart hammered within her chest. She could imagine exactly what sort of plans the Betrayer had for her. She was being kept alive and in good health for a reason, and it was not a pleasant one. Illidan intended to make her pay for his long imprisonment. She forced the thought down. She would face any torture when it came. She would not give her captors the satisfaction of seeing her afraid. "And he is testing you," she said. This time she allowed mockery to show in her voice. "He does not trust you." "I doubt he trusts anybody," Akama said. "If you were he, would you?" "I would never be like him." "You are more like him than you can possibly know. You are just as ruthless and just as obsessed. You sacrificed your friends without a second thought when it suited your purpose. You sacrificed the lives of all your followers." Maiev wanted to strike him but the bars restrained her. She glared at his lined face and said, "I do not accept your judgments, Akama. I have learned not to trust anything you say." "You can tell yourself that if you like, but look into your heart and you will see my words are true."
She grasped the bars as if she could somehow twist them out of shape and make her way through to him. Akama laughed. "You are still strong. That is good. You will need that strength in the days to come." "I am not frightened by your threats, old one." "You think that was a threat? Consider this, Maiev Shadowsong-Lord Illidan is not the only one who has plans for you." "What do you mean by that?" "I, too, have plans." Once again there was an ambiguous note in Akama's voice. Was this a veiled threat, or was it meant to sound like one while communicating something else? "I want no part of any of your schemes, treacherous one," Maiev said, hoping to draw him out. "You may have no choice before this is over." Akama turned and limped away. Despite herself, Maiev was sorry to watch him go. This was the closest thing she had had to a conversation since she had woken in captivity. And Akama was at least a familiar face. She wondered if this was what she was supposed to think, if it was all part of some subtle plan of the Betrayer's to wear her down. If it was, there was nothing she could do about it now. She just had to endure, be patient, and gather her strength. She had nothing else now but time. She swore she would find a way to make the Betrayer pay for all the deaths he had caused. Akama, too, when the moment came. She had begun to work out the composition of a spell that would help her trap Illidan. She would test it if ever she won her freedom.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE Two Months Before the Fall
THE HARSH SUN BLAZED DOWN ON THE PARCHED earth of Hellfire Peninsula, drying the blood almost as soon as it fell. Vandel chopped down the last of the demons, then walked over to retrieve his dagger from the eye of the one he had slain with a throw. Looking around, he could see they had achieved their objective. Lord Illidan stood beside the palanquins the demons had fought so hard to protect, arms folded across his chest, wings spread wide in triumph. The corpses of demons lay everywhere, slaughtered by the Illidari. Vandel's demon whispered hungrily in his mind. He fought the urge to gulp down demon flesh and instead climbed up a huge boulder and studied the battleground. He nodded at one of the new crop of demon hunters who had joined the ranks since the battle with the nathrezim. In the month since, they had almost replaced the casualties of that great battle in the archive of the dreadlords. They had lost more soldiers since that battle. It sometimes seemed that in the weeks that followed, they had never stopped fighting. That was not quite true. There had been a period when Illidan had retreated within his sanctum to consider his next move. For days they had done nothing but train and oversee the new recruits. Then the Betrayer had emerged with a new plan, and they had spent almost all their time in lightning raids against the Burning Legion. They must have fought a score of battles. They had attacked forge camps in Nagrand, and ambushed convoys passing through the Netherstorm. Time and again they had intercepted forces passing through Hellfire Peninsula. Some of the fights had been to close down portals the Legion opened into Outland. The logic of that was clear. No doubt the masters of the Burning
Legion thirsted for vengeance against Illidan. Their incursions had become ever more numerous. Their forces ever stronger. That had not been all of it, though. Some new portals had been opened into places Vandel recognized in Azeroth: Winterspring and Azshara. Illidan had insisted that the demon hunters close those and claim certain magical crystals used in their creation. He said the Legion had been launching invasions into Azeroth from Outland and this needed to be stopped. It was clear that the demons were planning another great assault. Not all of their gates could be closed. They had established mighty beachheads in the Blade's Edge Mountains and on the very edges of Nagrand. From what Vandel had overheard, there were more forge camps Illidan's forces had never seen and perhaps were never likely to. It was equally clear that Lord Illidan was seeking materials to create something. If forced to make a guess, Vandel would have said he was collecting components for another gateway such as the one he had opened to Nathreza. Vandel had heard some of the others, the ones knowledgeable about such things, mention this, and it seemed as good a theory as any. Vandel would not have been surprised to discover that they would find more of the crystals in the metal coffins this force had been escorting, along with other pieces of magical equipment that could be scavenged. Since his memorable speech after the battle, Lord Illidan had not seen fit to enlighten them any further as to his ultimate plan. He had merely dispatched them hither and yon to strike at the Legion, sometimes leading them himself, sometimes letting Elarisiel or Vandel take charge. There was no rhyme or reason to Illidan accompanying them. Sometimes the battles he led them into were little more than slaughters of fel orcs still loyal to the Burning Legion. Sometimes he was not with them when they faced their toughest opposition. Rumor had it that he worked strange rituals when the stars were right, that he was creating some work of sorcery that would lead them to inevitable victory. Below, Illidan studied the remains of the palanquins they had ambushed. Each of the coffins had been borne by half a dozen demonic servitors, and each of them now lay in the dust, their gleaming metallic sides losing their luster. Before Illidan a fel orc hovered in the air, one of the Legion's soldiers, bound by the Betrayer's magic.
Vandel vaulted down the rocks, leaping from boulder to boulder, passing over precipices where the slightest misstep would send him plunging to his doom. He hit the ground rolling, sprang to his feet, and strode over to Lord Illidan's side. "Anything to report, nightstalker?" the Betrayer asked. As ever he seemed to know that Vandel was there without having to look. It was less disconcerting now that Vandel knew how the trick was done and could do it himself. "The perimeters are secure, Lord, and we do not appear to be under immediate threat." "I would not be too sure of that if I were you," Illidan said. "Lord?" "I think the Burning Legion has finally worked out what I am doing." "How would they do that, Lord?" "Perhaps they have spies left in our ranks. Only one of these canisters contains the helstones I seek. The rest are filled with rocks." "How can you tell?" "Use the sight the ritual gave you." Vandel concentrated on the metal cylinders and saw immediately what his overlord had meant. One of them blazed with contained energy as if filled to the brim with scintillant crystals. The others did not burn nearly so bright. They contained no trapped magical energy that Illidan could use for whatever it was he planned. As if to prove his point, Illidan leaned forward and wrenched one open. Glittering gemstones rolled out, but so did a number of glassy shards. One who did not possess the spectral sight of a demon hunter might have been fooled, but one who could see the presence of magic itself was not deceived. "You think this is a trap then?" "Possibly, or merely a deception intended to lure us to a different place while the real cargo goes by another route. I think this highlord Kruul I have been hearing so much about is cleverer than the Legion's former field commanders." "Who is he?" Vandel asked. "Let us find out," Illidan said. He turned to the fel orc, who floated in the air, wrapped in chains of energy. His face twisted into a defiant sneer. "I know you, Betrayer. You are well named."
"If I had a copper for every time I have heard that, I could build a tower of coins to the nearest moon," Illidan said. "I wish my enemies could come up with something more original." The fel orc tried to spit at Illidan, but his saliva sizzled and evaporated when it hit an energy chain. "Tell me of Highlord Kruul," Illidan said. "I would know more of your new general." "I will tell you nothing," said the fel orc. "I do not fear any torture you can inflict." "As you wish." Illidan gestured. Magical energy surged from his outstretched hands to the fel orc's head. The chains pulsed brighter. The fel orc screamed. His spirit departed, leaving only a shell. Vandel could see that. Illidan said, "Tell me of Highlord Kruul." The corpse opened its mouth and laughed. "No need, Betrayer. No need. He approaches. Ask him yourself." Magical energy pulsed from within the metal cylinders, visible as light to Vandel's altered vision. It swirled into the air, forming a shimmering vortex. A moment later, a portal sprang into being where the power coalesced. A blast of furnace-like heat filled the air, driving the Illidari back and incinerating the fel orc's corpse. An enormous figure emerged, flanked by two blazing infernals. He looked like a doomguard, Vandel thought, but larger. He had horns like a tauren, massive, bison-like. Huge wings draped his back. Yellow demonic runes glared on his bracers. In his right hand he clutched a gigantic black blade on which runes pulsed in subdued blue. The sword looked large enough to take down an Ashenvale oak with one swipe. "So you are the one who defeated Magtheridon," the demon said. "You don't look like much." His voice boomed brazenly over the battlefield. Flames trailed behind him when he walked, as if the very ground could not bear the touch of his hooves without combusting in fear. It said something of Kruul's confidence that he was prepared to face an army of demon hunters only with his infernal bodyguards. Looking at him, Vandel judged his self-assurance justified. He blazed with power. Currents of potent magic swirled around him. "And you look like just another doomguard," Illidan said. "Have you come to see if you can get vengeance for the doom of your brethren's
homeworld?" Kruul's laughter rang out. "That was well done. Destruction wreaked upon the destroyers. But, no, I have not come to seek vengeance. I have come to kill you." Illidan unsheathed his warglaives. "Others have tried. I shall pen you beside Magtheridon and use your blood to build my armies." "My blood would burn your little pets. You would only have charred husks to serve you." As the gigantic doomguard spoke, more and more infernals poured through the portal. Their skin blazed with searing heat. They seemed to grow stronger in Kruul's presence. In the hills around them, Vandel sensed the Illidari moving into position. They were ready to attack. "I have charted the portals you have been opening," Illidan said. "You have been busy. Ironforge, Stormwind City, Orgrimmar. Silithus. The Plaguelands. You seek to invade Azeroth once more, do you not?" Highlord Kruul merely bared his massive teeth. "And I have studied your reaving of our forces, and I see a pattern to it. You seek to build another gateway, don't you? Ah, but to where, is the question. I have heard of your boasting. Could it be you are truly mad enough to seek Argus?" "Perhaps we will discuss this while I have you imprisoned in Hellfire Citadel." "I fear that your time for discussion has run out." Even as Kruul spoke, a massive core hound appeared from the portal. Its red skin blazed with fire. Two heads emerged from its gigantic shoulders. Their monstrous jaws made those of a felhound look feeble. Metallic armor encased its heavy shoulders and forelimbs. It bounded forward to attack even as Kruul sent a bolt of dark energy hurtling toward Illidan. The lord of Outland leapt into the air and avoided it. It smashed into the rocks behind where he had stood. They turned to dust, as if they had suffered a million years of erosion in a moment. Vandel found himself face-to-face with Kruul's demonic pet. Its jaws gaped. Lava bubbled within them. The infernals lumbered toward him. Vandel vaulted over the core hound. His feet briefly touched the hot metal of its armor. He propelled himself into the air before they had time to scorch. As he did so he sent his own bolt of fel
energy blazing down into the demon. It struck one of the heads and elicited a brief scream. The thing's skin darkened at the point of contact and began to putrefy. From the slopes, a dozen demon hunters joined in, sending a fusillade of fel energy into the core hound's skin, smashing into the infernals and sapping them of life. Kruul swept his blade through the air and invoked his power. A hail of shadow energy lashed out. A volley of bolts hurtled at the demon hunters. Some fell wounded. Others slumped to the ground. Kruul seemed to visibly swell as he feasted on their deaths. Behind him the gigantic portal still blazed. Vandel somersaulted at the top of his arc, pulled his blades clear of their sheaths, and dropped onto the demonic hound's back. Pain flared where his skin touched the creature's burning flesh. He aimed for a weak spot in the armor and drove his blades in. There was a satisfying crunch as points punched through scaled flesh. Molten ichor spurted, searing his skin. He vaulted clear of the beast and rolled to one side, narrowly avoiding the trampling feet of a gigantic infernal. He dived between the demon's legs, ignoring the scorching heat. His movements took him closer to Kruul. The doomguard paid him no mind. All his attention seemed focused on Illidan. Magical energies swirled around the lord of Outland, gathering in a thunderhead of power as he invoked them. More demon hunters emerged from the hillside, moving to engage the infernals and the core hound. Some of them dared race forward to challenge Kruul himself. Kruul flexed his wings and there came a sound like thunder. Those nearest the demon were thrown back. Their movements were slowed. For combatants who relied so much on mobility, this made them vulnerable. Kruul's monstrous blade swept out and chopped an attacker in half. The demon hunter's blood vanished as if the runes on the blade had absorbed it, and Kruul grew visibly stronger. The demon inside Vandel stirred at the sight of all this death. It longed to feed as Kruul fed. Vandel channeled all his rage into another fel bolt and lashed out at Kruul. The magical energies splintered on whatever aura protected the demon lord. Kruul raised his blade, pointed it at Illidan, and sent another titanic bolt of shadowy energy blazing up at his opponent. Illidan deflected it with a counterspell.
A low growl from behind told Vandel that the core hound had returned to seek prey. He flipped himself around to face it. Half of one of its heads had been torn away. Molten ichor spilled from several wounds in its side. Still the creature's unnatural vitality kept it moving. It bounded toward him, mouths gaping, flames leaking around its teeth. He leapt to meet it. His blades snapped home, piercing each eye of one head, and then he jumped away to the creature's blind side, scampering quickly to keep out of its line of sight. The creature turned. Its nostrils dilated as it sniffed the air, attempting to find him. Enraged, Kruul smashed through the demon hunters. They did their best to leap clear, but his blade slew two more. Their strikes seemed to have no more effect on him than gnat bites. The core hound put its noses to the ground and kept sniffing. It began to move in Vandel's direction. He sent a bolt of fel energy lashing at it, and kept the beam playing on the creature, draining its life away. From the air above came a titanic surge of power as Illidan finally unleashed the spell he had been weaving. The enormous bolt of hellfire smashed into Kruul and sent him sprawling. "No! That is not possible." The highlord's booming voice echoed across the battlefield. There was pain in it, and a massive gap in his armored chest piece where the bolt had struck home. Venomous smoke emerged from the gap, and wounded flesh pulsed within. Kruul raised himself up and sprang toward the blazing portal. It closed behind him. Vandel stabbed the demon hound through the chest and left his blade buried in its heart. The infernal bodyguards collapsed into piles of rocks.
* * *
THE ILLIDARI GATHERED THEIR wounded and their dead and prepared to depart the battlefield. Illidan studied the remains of the carnage. Kruul had been strong, no doubt of that, and he had been cunning. This trap had been set with care, and only the fact that Kruul had misjudged Illidan's strength had let him escape its jaws.
It was only a matter of time before a new invasion of Azeroth began. Perhaps that was to the good. It would distract the Legion while Illidan finalized his own designs. It troubled him that Kruul had mentioned his plan to seek out Argus. He should not have boasted about that before he was ready to strike. That had been a mistake. He had let the thrill of triumph overcome his reason when he had done that. Additionally, he felt there was more going on here than met the eye. He was missing something, and the feeling of it gnawed at him. It was time to go back to the Black Temple and complete the preparations as fast as he could. The hour was getting late, and he could not afford to have anything go wrong now.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO Two Months Before the Fall
BEHIND THE BUSHES OF THE PLEASURE GARDEN, Vandel hunched out of sight of the blood elves. They laughed and swigged ethermead from crystal beakers. One youth had a courtesan under each arm and kissed each in turn. Another flexed a small whip in imitation of the succubi in the Den of Mortal Delights below. A tall, beautiful sin'dorei girl played a seven-stringed lute and improvised verses about a fel orc chieftain and a doomguard that were not flattering to either of her subjects. The Grand Promenade seemed a world away from the endless warfare taking place beyond the Black Temple. It was one reason why Vandel had taken to sneaking in here of an evening. The precincts of the inner temple were a complete contrast with the stern, martial aspect of the rest of the great fortress, created for Illidan's blood elf followers for their own relaxation. The promenade had remained a refuge and a reward for those blood elves who had stayed loyal to Illidan even after Kael'thas's disappearance. The party of revelers sprawled on the manicured lawn. Silk-clad girls held tiny tidbits of devilfish at a finger's length above the lips of the males. The demon hunters had never been forbidden from entering the Black Temple. They had never been invited, either. They kept apart from the rest of the Illidari forces, as much from their blood elf kin as from the orcs and the Broken and the demons. No one visited them in the ruins of Karabor who could help it, and they mingled with none. There were times when Vandel wanted to be apart even from his fellow demon hunters. He liked to hone his skills by slipping past the temple sentinels and entering the unholy precincts of the place itself. He had climbed the great chains in the Sanctuary of Shadows and gazed in wonder on the huge statues that dominated the place. The satyr guardians had
flinched away from him as if they sensed he hungered for their flesh. He had scuttled through the gloomy orc-haunted precincts of Gorefiend's Vigil and eluded the gaze of even the most alert of the Shadowmoon clan. He had inspected their magical forges, and witnessed their spellcasters animating the bones of the dead. He had looked down upon the vast training area where demons marshaled and the Dragonmaw orcs trained their dragons amid the hulls of gigantic war machines. He had clambered across the battlements and looked out across the plains toward Warden's Cage, where Maiev Shadowsong was imprisoned. But the Grand Promenade was the place he liked the best. The fountains tinkled. It was the sound of running water that first attracted him, and the scent of plants, some of them familiar from the forests of Ashenvale. It reminded him of home, of the night elf he had once been. It was a sweet torment. It brought back memories of his family. There were times when that calmed him. He could pick a blossom and sniff it and remember the times when he had brought back bouquets for his wife when she had been pregnant with Khariel. At other times it stirred up the demon within him and fed its vengeful fury. Tonight it made him envy the sinful laughter of the blood elves at play. He reached out from the undergrowth and plucked a bottle of ethermead from the hamper. The revelers were too involved with one another to notice him. He uncorked it and took a sip. It tingled on his tongue, and for a moment he felt relaxed. Briefly he wondered whether the demon had encouraged him to do it. Tonight he did not care. Tonight he wanted to remember other things than the battles of the past few weeks, the rumors that the Burning Legion was mustering for a new offensive. His nostrils caught the musky aroma of succubus blown from the terraces below by the hot night wind. His mouth watered. The hunger to kill banked up within him. These demons might be bound. They might be sworn to serve Illidan. They might be allies but still they felt like enemies. They felt like prey. Trudging along the path near the revelers came Akama. The Broken moved through the garden from the direction of the council chamber, heading back down into the depths of the temple. Doubtless he had come from some
late-night meeting with Illidan himself. His head was down. His gaze focused on nothing. A great weight pressed down on his shoulders. A blood elf raised his head and shouted, "Come, old Broken, join us for a drink!" One of the girls tittered. "Oh, Luzen. He is so ugly." "Anyone is ugly compared with you, Alesha. Hey, old Broken. Stop your hobbling for a minute and drink with us! Damn you, Alesha! Where is that bottle of ethermead? Did you gulp it down while I was not looking?" Vandel raised it in mocking toast to the blood elf. He was so deep in shadow that no one could see him. Akama hobbled on. "Hey, old monster, are you too good to be seen drinking with us?" There was anger in Luzen's voice now. He sounded as if he was ready for violence. Akama stopped. His head turned, and he gazed upon the blood elves. He did not say anything. All present could feel the power in him. He ceased to be an old, worn-out Broken and grew into something vast and powerful and terrible. Not something to be mocked by sin'dorei aesthetes. Menace filled the night, and the blood elves froze like rabbits seeing the shadow of an owl. For a moment, all was still, and a premonition of violence hung in the air. Then Akama shrugged and smiled and made a gesture of benediction like a senile old priest blessing a group of children. He hobbled away. The blood elves were silent for a long time after that. Vandel stole away, wondering about Akama and his secret sorrows.
* * *
AKAMA TOOK THE WALKWAY into the Sanctuary of Shadows and fought down the urge to lengthen his stride as he passed the refectory. As always, when he passed that dreadful place, he was filled with a sense of horror. He did not want to look upon the thing he knew was in there, bound by Ashtongue channelers. It was part of him. It was all the darkness from his soul and a great portion of his pride, ambition, and will. It was being fed evil magical energies, and if allowed to go free, it would devour him utterly and walk the world in his body.
The thing in the refectory would eat him from the inside and use his voice to turn his followers over to the darkness. Already many of them were a long way down that road. They owed more loyalty to Illidan than they did to the ideals of their own people. Well were they named, the Broken. The demons had shattered their spirit almost beyond repair. They had become so used to drifting that they would follow any strong voice, and there was none stronger than the Betrayer. Some of Akama's people responded to their master as slaves responded to the lash. They obeyed quickly, unquestioningly, with total obedience. They had lost all ability to think for themselves and would perform any dark deed required of them, passing the blame and the responsibility on to the one who gave the orders. Akama looked upon the satyrs and the other demons profaning what had once been the most sacred spot of his people. It made him want to weep, just as the sight of those arrogant blood elves lolling around in what had once been the beautiful temple garden made him want to howl in fury. What had happened to the Temple of Karabor was symbolic of what had happened to the draenei. Every evil thing that had ever happened to them had taken root here. And over the whole dark cavalcade, Illidan presided. The triumphant demons strutting through the sanctuary mocked his passage. They knew what had been done to him. They looked at him and they saw only a decrepit Broken bound by the same monstrous will that had bound them. They saw what he wanted them to see. They could not look into the secret chambers of his mind, where his thoughts were still his own. He kept them shielded even in his sleep. Not even Illidan could look within those warded areas. At least that was what he told himself. There were times when he wondered whether the spell that bound him also deceived him. Perhaps it allowed him these illusions of freedom, all the better to lull him into submission. Perhaps Akama was more like his people than he knew. Perhaps he was, after all, the perfect broken leader for a perfectly broken people. No. The day was coming when he would move against Illidan, as sure as the sun rose over Outland. He had to believe that. He would use the secret network of agents he had built up under Illidan's very nose. He would find new allies and use them to oppose Illidan's will. The Betrayer would regret
that he had been too wrapped up in his mad schemes to pay attention to his lowly Broken servant. Akama ground his teeth together. He would make Illidan pay for what he had done to the souls of the Broken at the Hand of Gul'dan. The lord of Outland would have cause to lament that he had spared the life of Maiev Shadowsong. Akama paused and unclenched his fists. He let his mouth fall open. He made sure that once again he looked the part of the chastened, humble Broken. The hollowness within his soul mocked him. Perhaps he was being allowed to do all these things. Perhaps he was just a lure to draw out those whom Illidan could not trust. Perhaps he was bait in a trap for Illidan's enemies as he had been for Maiev. He took a deep breath through his flat nostrils, and exhaled, as he had been taught to do back when he had been a novice in the Temple of Karabor. He remembered when this place had been a haven of peace and purity, a sanctuary for the sick and the weak. The thought calmed him for a moment, but then he caught sight of his own distorted shadow cast against the wall. He was just as twisted now as the temple, and he wondered if either of them would ever find their way back to what they had once been. Curse you, Illidan. Curse you and all your schemes. What are you up to now?
* * *
HIGH NETHERMANCER ZEREVOR HELD the Seal of Argus. He turned it over and over in his hands. The blood elf's silver crown glinted as he tilted his head to one side. An expression of interest appeared in eyes resembling pools of fel green light. "I understand why you sought this so long, Lord. It should allow you to find what you are seeking. It is a compass for locating Argus." Illidan snapped his wings open, then settled them back around his shoulders. He allowed a note of irony to show in his voice. "Really? You are certain?" Zerevor flinched at the mockery. "As certain as anyone can ever be when dealing with the magic of the Burning Legion." Lady Malande's laughter tinkled around the council chamber. "And, as ever, you try to cover yourself in case of error, Zerevor."
Gathios the Shatterer, resplendent in his gleaming paladin armor, opened his mouth as if he was going to say something, then shut it again. He rarely spoke when matters were not concerned with warfare. Instead he exchanged a knowing glance with Veras Darkshadow. The lean assassin smiled in acknowledgment. Had they been plotting against their companions again? Impatience curled Illidan's fist. "Let him finish, Malande." The lovely priestess shot him a hurt look. Her beauty had driven many an elf to distraction. She seemed to regard his own indifference as a challenge. A cold smile flickered across Zerevor's face. "It could be used to steer us through the Burning Legion's network of portals and gateways. It could guide us all the way back to Kil'jaeden and legendary Argus." "I know this," Illidan said. "I have always known this. Why do you bring it up now? What is your point?" The high nethermancer looked over at the schemata spread on the trestle table. They represented Illidan's masterwork, but clearly something about them had Zerevor worried. "We could use their own gateways to reach Argus. There is no need for this new portal of yours, Lord. It is a work of genius, but why reinvent the wheel? With but the simplest modification, you could use your spell to tap into the Legion's system of portals." "Because if we use the Legion's network, we will need to pass through multiple portals, giving the demons an opportunity to block us every step of the way. This gateway will take us to Argus in one jump. It will let us attack by surprise. It will ensure our lines of communication are short and can be easily maintained." The other three councilors nodded as if they agreed with every word. Zerevor persisted in his questioning. "If it works, Lord. You are taking a titanic risk. The expenditure of energy needed will be on a scale unlike anything we have ever used before. Would it not be simpler to take advantage of what already exists?" "Simpler but far more dangerous. The Legion outnumbers us by a factor of thousands. Its forces are dispersed, but if we give them time to assemble, they will crush us." Zerevor held up the seal to eye level, as if by doing so, he could conceal his expression from Illidan's perceptions. "And attempting to open this gateway could shatter the world again as Ner'zhul shattered Draenor. If the spell is not perfectly cast. If there are any mistakes in the calculations."
Illidan reached out and took the seal from his grasp. "There are no mistakes in the calculations. The spell will be perfectly cast. I will do it myself." "And if you are wrong, Lord?" "I am not wrong." Illidan focused his attention completely on his councilor. He loomed over him, letting him feel the breeze from his slowly moving wings. Zerevor looked away, shoulders slumped, palms open. "As you say, Lord. As you say." Then the high nethermancer's face went pale. Beads of sweat appeared on his forehead. He closed his eyes and frowned in concentration. "What is it?" Illidan demanded. "The warding spells I set over the Dark Portal have just been tripped. The gateway has become fully operational. Someone has opened a pathway between Outland and Azeroth so wide that you could bring an army through. And that appears to be exactly what is happening."
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE Two Months Before the Fall
FROM THE RIDGE, THEY HAD A FINE VIEW OF THE DARK Portal, and a demoralizing one, Vandel thought. The gateway to Azeroth glowed darkly within a mighty arch, reached by the titanic steps of the Stair of Destiny. It was not the sight of it that depressed him. It was the army surrounding it. Since the confrontation with Highlord Kruul, the Burning Legion had rushed armies into Outland so quickly they could not be contained. Most of them seemed to be down there now, in the valley and along the road leading to the Dark Portal. Thousands of demons and tens of thousands of their worshippers camped out. They had come through scores of portals, all opened simultaneously in such numbers that not all could be closed. It seemed as if they were intent on proving to Lord Illidan how futile his plans for opposing them were. More and more of the Legion's troops marched along the road from Zangarmarsh into Hellfire Peninsula. The Legion's forces were moving with a terrible purpose, and that could only be a new invasion of Azeroth. The way to his homeworld was open again, and for days now the Legion had poured forces through. So many and yet so few. All those soldiers and demons and war engines down there looked imposing, but recollecting the vision he had during the ritual of transformation, Vandel knew that they were but the tiniest fraction of what the Burning Legion could bring to bear. Every day more and more of them arrived. He tried to imagine the uncountable distance they covered to reach this place, the vast gulfs between worlds they had passed through, and he could not. The Dark Portal itself was daunting enough. The two robed stone giants on either side of the titanic arch reminded him of similar sculpted figures
within the Black Temple. They leaned on blades large enough to smash the walls of Stormwind City. Lights shimmered within the portal, glittering like trapped stars. Another convoy moved along the road to deliver its cargo of soldiers and munitions to the vast encampment in the portal's shadow. The Illidari had tried to stop the convoys from getting through. They had set ambushes, attacked head-on, but it was pointless. Their enemies were too numerous and too powerful, and they were merely throwing away resources that would be needed to defend the Black Temple when the final attack came. Illidan's boast that he was going to take the war to Kil'jaeden also seemed pointless now, no more threatening than a child dressing up in his father's armor and waving his father's sword would be to a veteran soldier. Vandel looked from face to face. Illidan's wore a sneer, as if this whole vast army was beneath his contempt. Needle's face twisted in a mad grin that stretched the seams stitched in his lips. Elarisiel looked quite frankly afraid, and Vandel wondered whether her demon was taking over her mind and manipulating it. His own inner demon radiated a sense of satisfaction. This demonstration of strength by the Burning Legion pleased it. It would be welcome down there among that mighty force. He could join its invincible ranks at any time and have worlds as his playthings until the universe fell into ruin and was reborn. Why are we here? Vandel wondered. Had Illidan brought them here merely to depress them? Such was not his way. There must be a purpose to it. Vandel remembered what the Betrayer had done to the portal to Nathreza. Perhaps he planned the same thing here-a suicidal charge at the gate, a spell of destruction to make it explode, and then that whole army down there would be gone. As would the demon hunters. The Burning Legion could always find more troops. Who would be left to oppose it once Illidan's forces were in their graves? Why should it be opposed? his inner demon whispered. Why should you even try? You belong to it. You always have. Even as the thought occurred to him, the flow of power around the gate increased a thousandfold. Troops surged through the portal, coming from
Azeroth. Orcs moved alongside humans, night elves beside blood elves. Gryphons soared into the sky above the gateway. Wyverns flew beside them. Spells shimmered in the air. Magical weapons cleaved through demon hide. A squad of felguard moved to block the Stair of Destiny, but a huge orc armed with a mighty hammer smashed his way through them. Beside him a human carrying a shield watched his back. It was astonishing to see these peoples fighting alongside one another. Clearly the threat of Kruul's forces had done much to unite them. It looked as if the Alliance and the Horde together were invading Outland. Once the advance force of heroes was through, more and more troops emerged, marching in closely knit groups to secure the perimeter. A massive wrathguard smashed through one human line, a mighty axe clutched in each hand, the demon's body encased in gleaming armor. A company of orcs rushed to intercept him. A lightning bolt crackled and the wrathguard halted for a moment. The orcs dragged him down. More and more Azerothian troops poured through the gate. Their casualties were appalling but still they fought. For every human or orc or troll dragged down, another stepped into place. There must be a huge army assembled on the other side of the Dark Portal, Vandel thought, remembering the size of the Legion force that had passed through. All the kingdoms of the Alliance and all the realms of the Horde must have been stripped bare of combatants. The might of an entire world had been assembled to stand against the Burning Legion. Vandel could only pray that it would be enough. In the center of the Legion camp, he could see Highlord Kruul shouting orders to his force. Did he relish the coming combat or did he regret shoving a stick into this hornet's nest? Illidan crouched down for a moment, wings spreading wide behind him. He tilted his head to one side. A puzzled expression flickered across his face. "Did Kruul expect this? Did he want it?" His voice was soft, as if he was speaking to himself. "Why would he want to provoke an attack from both the Horde and the Alliance?" Vandel asked. Illidan's gaze remained locked on the conflict. "To draw out the forces of Azeroth, perhaps. To lure them away from their home ground into a place where they can be more easily destroyed."
"You think this is a trap, Lord Illidan?" "It has the feel of one. The question is, for whom? There is something here that I dislike." Vandel understood. The feeling of satisfaction his own demon radiated was troubling. Was it reacting on some level to something it sensed about this situation? If that was the case for Vandel, how much greater must the disturbance be for Illidan, who was so much more powerful and experienced? For a moment, Vandel felt something like guilt. As he watched a contingent of night elf combatants crash into the Burning Legion line, it struck him that he should be down there, fighting with them. He was a demon hunter, after all, and down there was one of the largest forces of demons ever assembled in Outland. But what would the kaldorei say when they saw him, tattooed with the markings of Illidan, their ancient enemy? They would not greet him as a friend and companion. They were more likely to take him for one of the demons they fought. He wondered if anyone he knew was riding with the army and if he was going to have to go out there and kill them. He was not sure what he would do if Illidan gave the order. He was a demon hunter, loyal to the Betrayer, but his war was against the Burning Legion, not against folk who had once been his kin. He was not their enemy, even if they thought they were his. What would he do, then? The answer was simple. If he was ordered to, he would fight. If kaldorei attacked him, he would kill them. Otherwise he would try to avoid them. More and more soldiers swept down the Stair of Destiny, a flood of armored flesh. A tidal wave of violence that carried all before it. Just for a moment, it looked as if the Burning Legion encampment might be overrun. Then Highlord Kruul entered the battle, and the offensive ground to a halt. Step by step, the armies of Azeroth were driven back up the stairs. The melee was brutal and deadly. There was no space for ducking or weaving, just a quick, savage exchange of spells or blows amid the press of bodies. Eventually the two forces achieved balance, with neither able to gain or lose a step, and the combat continued with unabated fury. Even as the battle teetered on the brink, a new threat to the armies of Azeroth emerged. A force of felguard, dreadlords, doomguard, and
wrathguard had assembled on the far edge of the Legion camp and moved along the ridge below, keeping out of sight of the main conflict. Highlord Kruul himself led them, accompanied by his core hounds. His intent was clear: to crash into the Azerothian line by surprise from the flank. Vandel was not sure how Kruul's force was going to do that. Perhaps the doomguard intended to fly up the side of the Stair of Destiny. Some of his minions could use their wings as well, although they might lose the element of surprise. Most likely they intended to keep close to the steep side and stay out of sight until they rose to the attack. They could use sorcerous portals to bring in the rest of their force. Illidan noticed the same thing. "If those demons can turn the orc flank, then the battle will be lost and the invaders will be sent back to Azeroth. The greater part of their force will be cut off and destroyed." There was a musing note to his voice, as if he was turning the possibilities over and over in his head, holding them up to the light to inspect them and see which was best for him. "We cannot let that happen," Vandel was surprised to hear his own voice say. Illidan turned in his direction. He had the Betrayer's attention. Illidan's wings clung rigidly around his body, as if he were concealing it. His head tilted to one side, and he said, "Of course, you are correct, Vandel. Take a company and intercept the demons before they reach the stairs. Stop them." Vandel was not sure whether he was being rewarded or punished for speaking out. It had taken the power of the Betrayer himself to vanquish Kruul during their last encounter. Vandel did not have that kind of strength, nor did any of his companions. Perhaps, working together, they might overcome the Burning Legion's field commander. He had been given a direct order, and he would obey, trusting that Illidan had some plan for victory. Vandel gestured to Elarisiel and a group of the others to follow him. Needle fell in by his side. They moved down the ridge, traveling as fast as they could to intercept Kruul's force while remaining out of sight of the combatants on the Stair of Destiny above.
* * *
THE DEMON HUNTERS COVERED the ground with the agility of panthers. Kruul's troops, as Vandel had suspected they would, had taken up position in the shadow of the stairs. The winged ones were already starting to fly up the side. The demons were a small force but a powerful one, and they might turn the course of the battle if they arrived in time. Vandel screamed a war cry. The demons turned to look in his direction. Their burning gazes fell on him. He aimed a fel bolt at the nearest, searing into the creature's monstrous armored body. Moments later he was amid the demons, cleaving and striking, ducking and rolling, evading the blasts the wrathguard unleashed from the strange weapons mounted in their chests. Highlord Kruul looked directly at Vandel. He lashed out with one of his deadly shadow bolts. Vandel leapt over it and closed with the giant demon. "Ah, little one, does your master fear to face me himself?" Kruul boomed. "No. He thinks I am a match for you," said Vandel. He stepped aside as Kruul's gigantic blade bit into the ground next to him. Chips of shattered rock drew blood from Vandel's side. He stabbed the highlord's tree-trunk-sized leg, aiming for a point behind the greave, and his blade recoiled from Kruul's protective aura. He rolled forward, hoping to put himself behind the doomguard and out of his line of sight. A brutal melee had erupted in the shadow of the vast stairs, hidden from the eyes of the combatants above. Vandel's roll took him into the middle of it. He twisted his head and saw that Kruul was already engaged with more demon hunters. One of them fell, cleaved in twain by that battering-ram-sized blade, and then the doomguard sent a volley of magical bolts ripping through his other attackers. The great core hounds snarled by his side. Vandel aimed himself at Kruul's back, but before he could leap, demons swarmed him. It took all his concentration just to remain alive. He killed first one felguard and then another, but for every one he chopped down, another moved into place. His limbs grew sluggish, and even his magical dagger blades began to dull and lose their edges. He fought amid a pile of bodies, elf and demon. Killing and killing until he had no more power left to draw on and even the gibbering demon voice in his head was silenced. He knew now that he was going to die, and he did not really care. He would sell his life dearly, taking as many demons into death with him as he
could. For the first time in months, he felt like a mortal elf, weary and slow. The demons came on relentless, unstoppable. The tide of battle carried him back toward the doomguard. Once more he found himself face-to-face with Kruul. Vandel ducked the swing of the highlord's massive blade, and then he stumbled. The demon's huge weapon passed through the spot where his head had been. He tried to pull himself to his feet but found he could not. Kruul stood over him, sword raised, and Vandel knew his last moment had come. The blade caught the bloody light of the Outland sun and then began its descent. Vandel refused to look away. He raised both daggers in a last, desperate attempt to parry. Kruul's chest exploded, leaving only a gaping hole through which Vandel could see Illidan, warglaives in hand, lightning swirling around them, the backwash of his shattering bolt of energy. The doomguard toppled. Vandel rolled aside as the demon's massive form smashed into the ground beside him. Once again Illidan had used a slow-building spell of awesome power to smite the highlord. Vandel and his companions had been a distraction. "You killed him," Vandel said. Illidan's smile was enigmatic. "Perhaps." All around he heard the sounds of battle. A score of demon hunters emerged to confront the demons, taking them in the flank as they had intended to do to the Azerothian forces. Off guard, leaderless, and facing an unknown number of foes, the demons broke into small groups and were destroyed piecemeal.
* * *
VANDEL PULLED HIMSELF TO his feet. The demons of Kruul's force were all dead. Still the hunger burned in him. He could kill a thousand of the Legion's minions and it would never be enough. He could obliterate a world of them and still be barely started. He recognized that impulse as the same one that drove the Legion itself, and at that moment he did not care. He just wanted to go on killing and killing.
His lips twisted into a snarl, and he made ready to seek out prey once more. Illidan placed a hand on his shoulder. "No more. Now is not the time. We have work elsewhere." For a moment Vandel considered striking the lord of Outland, but he restrained himself, and slowly the thirst for vengeance sank back to something he could control. He exhaled, and it seemed part of the rage left him with his breath. "We have saved the Alliance and the Horde here this day, and they will never know," Vandel said at last. "They do not need to know. It is enough that they are here." Illidan's smile showed the depth of his satisfaction. "They will keep the Burning Legion occupied while we engineer its defeat. The enemy of my enemy ..." The demon hunters pulled away from the battle, heading back up the slopes toward their initial vantage point. Vandel turned to gaze back at the conflict. More troops had marched through from the Azerothian side, a colossal wave of melee fighters and spellcasters. They fanned out to guard the flanks of their force, then began the work of clearing the stairs against their foes. The tide of battle had turned in their favor once more. It looked as if the forces of Azeroth had established a permanent foothold in Outland. Illidan flexed his wings triumphantly. "Now we must seek the Throne of Kil'jaeden."
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR Two Months Before the Fall
STREAMS OF MOLTEN GREEN LAVA FLOWED DOWN cliffs of shattered basalt. The air blazed with heat and fel magic. It tingled on Illidan's skin, filled his lungs with every breath. He glanced around and noted that on every boulder, every ledge, every shard of rock that stabbed at the sky, a demon hunter stood guard. They had driven off the Legion guards, but there was every chance the ritual he was about to perform would draw the attention of the demons' commanders. While in his trance state, he would be vulnerable, unable to fight or flee. He was taking a terrible risk here, but it was one that needed to be endured. If one of his followers proved to be treacherous, or even overly ambitious, his life would end. The Throne of Kil'jaeden. The name itself had power, setting up a resonance between the demon lord and this location. Huge magical energies flowed all around. Gul'dan had used the mountain as the site of the ritual that had bound the orc clans to the service of the Burning Legion before the First War. Gul'dan's absorbed memories now told Illidan this was the place to cast his spell. Here lay a great flaw in the fabric of the universe that was connected to the lair of the Deceiver himself. This night the flow of energies from the Twisting Nether would be at its strongest in years. He walked the edge of the great pattern he had inscribed in letters of fire on the black rock. He mouthed the words of the incantation, a constant, repetitive chanting, binding forces that he could hold in place with a mere fraction of his mind. All around monstrous energies coiled, waiting to be unleashed. It had taken weeks to forge this spell. It could only be cast at this exact location, at this exact hour, when all the signs were right.
He stared at the dark clouds in the blazing sky. A massive gout of lava spurted from the tortured depths of the earth, like demon blood pouring from a titanic wound. He took out the disk he had claimed on Nathreza and focused all his powers of perception on it. The psychic stench of the demon lords of the Burning Legion still clung to it. When he inspected it closely with his strange vision, he could picture them: Sargeras, bleak, uncompromising, a fallen titan radiating misery and despair; Archimonde, a mad warlord consumed with fury and rage, Sargeras's fist; Kil'jaeden, the schemer, so adept at corrupting so many. Who was Illidan to set himself against the likes of that awful trio? He touched the Seal of Argus, running his claws over the indentations of the runes until the cool metal squeaked. It was odd that it could stay so cold even here amid all the fire and fury. He passed around the edge of the sorcerous circle he had created, checking the wards, making sure that the energy flowed correctly through it, that he had made no mistakes. Now was not the time for errors. He was wasting time and that was folly. If he waited too long, the window in which the spell could be cast would close. Another would not arise for moons. He should proceed. And yet he could not make himself take the final step just yet. Soon, if things went according to his plan, he would be gazing upon those with the power to destroy him completely, and he would face them alone. It had not been so sweet, this life, and yet he found that now that the hour was upon him, he was still reluctant to leave it. He prowled the edge of the circle, probing it with tiny traces of magical energy. Ner'zhul's fate was a warning. The shaman had turned against his demonic masters and paid the ultimate price for his betrayal. There were times when Illidan wondered whether he was going to do the same-whether this was just a game for the demon lords, one in which the odds were all stacked in their favor and they derived amusement from the insect struggles of those who opposed them. He took a gulp of the air, catching the brimstone taint of the green lava. It was like breathing in the smoke from a great inferno. It made the lungs tingle and burn. Time was running out. In an instant, before he could stop himself or regret the decision, he spoke the final words of the spell, unleashing the tidal wave of power. It tore his
spirit from his body and sent it tumbling headlong into the Twisting Nether.
* * *
THE WAY OPENED BEFORE him. He felt as if he were falling into the runecovered disk, but he knew this was an illusion, a construct created by his mind to give him some sense of understanding what was going on here. Ultimately that was not possible for a brain born in natural reality, but his mind would do its best to provide him with a framework he could work with. His spirit emerged into the Twisting Nether and gazed down on Argus. The world hovered on the brink between the Twisting Nether and the physical universe, saturated with the fel energies of the Burning Legion. He tumbled headlong toward the surface of the world. Once it must have been beautiful, a place of crystalline mountains and shimmering seas. Now it was cold and cruel. A darkness brooded over the place, and a sense of corruption and loss. The seal pulsed in his claws. It was no longer the real disk but a representation of it, built from the magical energies of his spell, and it drew him downward to what he sought. The tug was almost irresistible and yet he fought against it, studying the sky, noting the position of stars and constellations, fixing them in his mind. Desperately he sought familiar signs in the sky, knowing that he could use them to plot his position in the cosmos. He looked also for magical energy tides, the auroral currents flowing out of the Twisting Nether. Was this really the place he sought? He orbited it swiftly, taking sightings, looking for signs, still fighting all the time the tug of the spell he had created. Once more he felt the cold, emotionless distance from his body. A prickling of paranoia tickled his sorcerously trained senses. For a moment, he thought he sensed a presence observing him. He glanced around but could find nothing. A thought occurred to him. If he could sense Kil'jaeden through this link, was it not possible the demon lord could sense him? He had created his spell in such a way that it should be impossible for any sorcerer to detect him, but what did he truly know of the Deceiver's capabilities? No sense in worrying about it now. He was committed beyond any possibility of turning back. He let his spirit swoop down over the jagged
crystalline mountains, saw the corruption that festered within them and caused them to crumble. He watched dust devils born of the powdered gems rise into the air and screech down canyons of serrated rock. Light shimmered and danced as it was refracted everywhere. Ahead of him lay a city, looming over canyons of fractured crystal. Within it were many presences, all of them capable of blasting his soul.
* * *
ILLIDAN FELT A SURGE of energy as his soul crossed the borders of the city. It, too, must have been beautiful once, laid out according to complex geomantic rules. Its curved structures reminded him of the draenei buildings of Outland, only these were far more intricate and beautiful. Outland's town halls were hovels compared with the fantastic structures he passed now. These were huge machines for focusing magic. Once, according to all he had been able to uncover, they had provided peace, harmony, and health to an entire world. Now they created a cloud of fear and despair visible to Illidan's spectral sight. At the center of the great city stood a mighty palace. Within lurked a massive, ominous presence surrounded by those only slightly less monstrous. It was to here that the disk drew Illidan. His spirit zoomed through the streets with the velocity of thought. He tried to slow himself down, to get things under control, to stop himself from being reeled in too swiftly. He forced himself to halt by the walls of the palace. He sensed another presence. Something lurked close by, studying him. He extended all his senses to the ultimate. There was something there, but he could not quite pin it down. It was as shielded as he was. A sentinel? Or something else? He forced himself to watch and wait, but nothing happened. Time to move. He slipped through the crystal corridors, past runes that glowed with evil significance. It was as if the core of all the spells that had once spread light and harmony across the city and the world had been rewritten to create the opposite. When he studied the runes, feelings of rage and despair filled his mind. Even shielded as he was, the spells affected him, filling him with visions of conquest, a lust for domination and destruction, a rage to end all things. Here, written in runes of fire, was the creed of the Burning Legion.
He looked on the representation of the seal. This would be the anchor for the gateway between Outland and Argus. He invoked the final phase of the spell. The disk pulsed in his hand as it absorbed energies from all around, strengthening the connection it already had with this place. Once he was done, he would no longer need to open a portal from the Throne of Kil'jaeden. He could use the link forged here with the seal instead. Dark energies began to permeate his astral form. A heaviness flowed through him. His spirit congealed, took on a glutinous physical quality born from the power all around him. He moved closer to the core of this dark labyrinth, feeling more and more the aura of the Deceiver. His movements slowed. His astral form floated lower and lower. For all his precautions, he had become trapped in the web of some terrible energy. The maze of spells surrounding him was binding its evil energies to his spirit. The presence he had felt earlier returned. He twisted, trying to locate it, but could not. He cursed. It had caught him, and it now only seemed a matter of time before his severed spirit floated into the presence of the Deceiver and was enslaved or destroyed. Desperately he fought against the spell. He sloughed off some of the magical plasm, regained something of the sense of weightlessness, but still he drifted into the vast throne room where Kil'jaeden sat surrounded by his court of demons. The eredar lord loomed gigantically, all red and burning. Vast batlike wings emerged from his back and seemed to reach to the ceiling. Huge amber lights blazed on his spiked shoulder guards. Fiery eyes dominated the face of a mutated draenei. An aura of awesome, thunderous power clung to him. There was no doubt. Illidan had found his way to the palace of Kil'jaeden on the lost world of Argus. Unfortunately, the burning gaze turned toward where he was. A twisted smile passed over that monstrous face. Massive nostrils flared as if catching the psychic scent of prey. Illidan felt the other watching presence again. It enwrapped him. He struggled against it but could not cast it off, even as Kil'jaeden's eyes lay fully upon him. The Deceiver's gaze rested there, pregnant with the threat of destruction; then it passed on. Something had turned it away from Illidan, and it took him a moment to realize what. The presence that enshrouded him now pushed him out of the edge of the throne room. He had a sense of it just for an instant. It
was a thing of Light, so bright as almost to be painful to behold. As he became aware of it, he heard a titanic roar of rage from within the throne room of Kil'jaeden, as if the eredar lord sensed it, too. The shackles of ectoplasm that had bound him sloughed away. Begone from this place. You cannot survive here. Not now. The voice spoke within his head and was gone. The spell of translocation snatched him back to the Throne of Kil'jaeden. Illidan's spirit crashed back into his physical form. He caught himself before he could fall, realized that he had been gone for only a heartbeat in this world even if it had felt like an eternity in the Twisting Nether. The Seal of Argus blazed crimson in his hands. He had done it. He had survived, and he had found out what he needed. He had confirmed the presence of Kil'jaeden upon Argus. He had found the beating heart of the Burning Legion. And he had found something else, a being who had aided him to escape when all seemed lost. He thought about the Light he had sensed within it and realized he did not trust the thing. Kil'jaeden was not known as the Deceiver for nothing. Perhaps this was all part of some vast and elaborate trap.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE The Last Month Before the Fall
ILLIDAN STOOD AT THE HEAD OF THE GREAT MAP table in the council chamber of the Black Temple. His advisers came and went, along with messengers bearing the latest news. The blood elves of his council argued with Akama and with Vandel and the other leaders of the demon hunters. Illidan rubbed his temples just below the horns. He had almost recovered the strength the spirit journey to Argus had cost him, and he could not let up yet. He needed to keep pressing on, to take advantage of what he had found out. He needed to face Kil'jaeden, and soon, before the Deceiver got wind of his plans and made ready for him. He was so deep in thought that it took him some time to realize that Lady Malande was speaking to him. "What is your command, Lord Illidan?" Malande was insistent. There was a note of urgency to her voice that demanded attention. Illidan turned his eyeless gaze on her in a way he knew to be discomfiting to those who lacked his spectral vision. "Concerning what?" Illidan said. He allowed his irritation to show. "About Coilfang Reservoir. The news is not good. Lady Vashj has been overthrown and the great pumps have been shut down." Coilfang Reservoir. Images of a vast pumping station full of magical engines leapt into his mind. He pictured miles of pipes running through gigantic underground caves. He thought about Vashj's plan to gain control of all the waters in Outland. It had seemed important once, but with events racing ahead so quickly, it was hardly worth dealing with. He had more urgent things to worry about. "What would you have us do, Lord Illidan?" Gathios the Shatterer asked. He stroked his chin with one gauntleted hand. "The Alliance and Horde have
established bridgeheads in Hellfire Peninsula. They have sacked Hellfire Citadel and destroyed Magtheridon. Should we strike back?" Illidan considered the paladin's question-what was there to do? The Azerothians had done more than engage the Burning Legion. They had taken one of the greatest Illidari fortresses. It was just the latest in a long string of setbacks. This one would cost him dearly in the long run. Without the pit lord's blood, there would be no more fel orcs for his legions. Except the long run no longer mattered. Things would be settled soon, and they would not be settled in Outland but on Argus. He had the true location of Kil'jaeden's homeworld, but he had found it in spirit form. Now he needed to be able to transport an army there in the flesh. It would take power to open such a portal, vast amounts of power. Only one source of such was available to him. He would need to use souls, and far more of those than had been used to open the way to Nathreza. Gathios loomed at his full height. He banged his chest plate with one mighty fist. "Lord Illidan, what should we do? The Alliance and the Horde are expanding on all fronts. They engage our forces as well as the Burning Legion's. Should we withdraw to the Black Temple? Should we stand firm and throw them back?" It seemed that Illidan's hope that the Azerothians would focus on the Burning Legion had been a deluded one. Their hatred for him was so great they were prepared to ignore the larger threat. Kruul must have known they were as vengeance-crazed as Maiev Shadowsong when he lured them into invading Outland. Well, Illidan had made the doomguard pay for that. Someday soon he must visit Maiev and show her exactly how unhappy he was with her, too. But he did not have time for any of this now. The fate of existence rested on his shoulders. "Do what is necessary," Illidan told Gathios. He scattered the tokens on the map with a sweep of his claw. "Other matters demand my attention." An appalled silence filled the council chamber. All gazes turned to him, expecting leadership. He had made a mistake. He still needed his people to have faith in him, to follow him to the final battle. Illidan leaned on the map table and looked at each one in turn-the demon hunter leaders, Akama, Gathios, the rest of his council, all of the others. "We are fighting a war to preserve all existence from the fury of the
Burning Legion," he said. "It does not matter whether we hold Outland for a few more years. Once the Legion regroups, it can bring overwhelming force against us. What happens here and now is no longer important save as it bears upon the true struggle." The silence deepened. The demon hunters nodded. They had shared his vision. They knew what the Burning Legion truly was. They understood the magnitude of the threat it represented. The others looked unsure. Fury filled Illidan's heart. He wanted to lash out, to strike their uncomprehending faces. He drew himself back from the brink, tried to look at things as they might. They saw only the fiefdoms they ruled, the power they held, slipping from their grasp. They feared for their lives, as if those lives could have any meaning in the face of the cosmic threat of the Legion. They did not understand that victory here on Outland merely preserved their lives for a few more months or years. The end was coming for them all, unless Kil'jaeden was defeated, unless the Burning Legion was destroyed. It was not their fault that they saw only the smallest details of the overall picture. He had never really troubled himself to convince them otherwise. He had relied on their ambitions, their greed, the things he could offer them to keep them loyal. It was time he let the others know how things stood. "We need to take the war to Kil'jaeden," he said. "You have said this before, Lord," said Akama, "and of course we all agree." His tone and the looks of the advisers scattered around the room made it clear that they did anything but agree. "But surely we must keep our bases secure so that we can launch our great attack." Illidan shook his head, and he knew he had their complete focused attention now. "We need keep our bases secure only so long as it takes to open the way to Argus." Akama looked at him as if caught somewhere between horror and awe. "You are ready to reclaim the original home of my people?" "I am. I wish to see the ones defiling it dead, finally and forever," Illidan said. "And I know how to do that." "My people fled from there millennia ago. It fell to those who allied with Sargeras, to the followers of Archimonde and Kil'jaeden. It must lie a thousand worlds in the distance, through a thousand portals." High Nethermancer Zerevor smirked as if he already knew the answer. Veras Darkshadow listened in silence. Illidan sensed growing excitement
among his demon hunters. "If we followed the paths along which the draenei fled, that would be true," said Illidan. "I propose a more direct route." "You plan on opening a portal through the Twisting Nether all the way to Argus? Forgive me for saying so, Lord, but that is impossible." "Not impossible, Akama, merely extremely difficult. I can open the way there. Anything is possible using magic when you have a sufficient concentration of power and knowledge." Akama appeared to be doing a quick calculation in his head. "There is no such concentration of power except the sort you used to get to Nathreza." Illidan nodded, encouraging Akama to continue with his line of thought. Vandel surprised Illidan by speaking up. "Is it worth it, Lord? Can we truly end the Burning Legion's threat?" Illidan glanced from face to face. The truth was that he did not know. He was only making a leap in the dark. Perhaps the Legion was invincible. Perhaps killing Kil'jaeden would make no difference. Of one thing he was certain, though. "I have dwelled on that question for ten thousand years and more, Vandel," he said. "Since first I made contact with Sargeras, since the first time I truly understood what the Burning Legion was." He paused for a moment, recollecting that. He had been shown the same vision he had shared with the demon hunters, only a hundred times more vividly. It had been meant to convince him that the Legion was invincible, that it was pointless to oppose the will of Sargeras, that the best and only thing he could do was join the Legion and have a say in the remaking of the universe. His mind had not crumbled, though. He had remained who he was. He had taken what he had seen and used it to motivate himself through all the long centuries of opposition. He had had plenty of time to dwell on such things, he thought bitterly. "I was imprisoned for ten thousand years. In those ten millennia I was not idle. I considered everything I had learned about the Legion. I ran through every possible way of opposing it. All the ways anyone could oppose it. That was why I had joined the Legion. I sought to learn all that I could about it. I gave up everything for that knowledge. I know more about the Burning Legion than any living creature save perhaps its rulers, if you wish to count
them among the living. I learned many things but they all boil down to one stark and terrible fact. "I learned that there is no way that the Legion can be defeated by simply waiting for it to come to you. "The Legion is too strong. If you turn it back once, it will return. If you turn it back a thousand times, it will return. And every time, it will be stronger. Its commanders will have learned from their mistakes. Its generals will be prepared for your strategies. "They are immortal. Their souls cannot be destroyed in most places. They can be merely thrown back into the Twisting Nether. Eventually they are reborn there, with all the knowledge of their previous lives. Imagine fighting a warrior who, every time you kill him, comes back. And this warrior remembers the trick you used to defeat him previously, and returns prepared for it. Eventually you run out of tricks. You run out of luck. That is why the Legion cannot be beaten on Azeroth. The spirits of demons can only be destroyed in the Twisting Nether, in places where it bleeds into the world of mortals, or in places utterly saturated with the demonic energies of the Burning Legion. Nathreza was one such place. Argus is another. "There have been those who thought they had defeated the Burning Legion. Dreadlords stride through the ashes of their worlds. Infernals desecrate the tombs of their children. You cannot beat the Legion by fighting it on its terms. In the end you can only lose. "There is only one way of winning: to assault the Burning Legion where it can be destroyed. It is a slim chance, but it is our only one. We do not have a choice. All we can do is stand and wait to die, or we can take the war to Sargeras and his minions. We will destroy the lieutenants who motivate the Legion's forces. We will slay Kil'jaeden, and Archimonde, too, if he has been reborn. Sargeras needs commanders to control his soldiers. Without them, the eredar will fall to fighting among one another, and piecemeal may be destroyed." Akama and most of Illidan's other advisers stared, in horror and in wonder. The demon hunters merely nodded. "I will take this war to Argus. You!" Illidan swept his arm about the room, gesturing to the assembled tattooed fighters. "All of you claimed you wanted to take your vengeance on the Burning Legion. I am offering you the greatest chance anyone has ever had to do that. We will take demon lives as a reaper takes wheat, and we will
kill their commanders in a place from which they cannot return. All of you have proved yourselves worthy to accompany me." He let that sink in. He was not asking them to accompany him. He was telling them that they were worthy, and it was the truth. He saw them, one by one, nod their agreement. "Go now. Tell the others. Prepare for the opening of the way to Argus." "Where are you going?" Akama asked. His voice was little more than a hoarse whisper. He tugged at the tendrils on his chin, appalled. "To a place where there are many souls waiting for dissolution. To Auchindoun." "The mausoleum of the draenei, Lord? But it is sacred." Illidan focused his attention on Akama. Had there been a note of rebelliousness in his voice? "Not to me, faithful Akama." Akama lowered his head slowly. His shoulders slumped. Illidan knew he did not like what was going on, but for the sake of his own soul and those of his people, he would have to accept it. "As you say, Lord." Illidan spread his arms and wings wide. "Go now, all of you. You will all have parts to play before the end."
* * *
VANDEL WATCHED THE OTHERS depart from the room. He took a last glance at the great map board with its counters representing scattered armies. It looked like a toy now, a child's puzzle that had nothing to do with the business they were undertaking. As he followed the others out of the council chamber, he thought about Illidan's words and the vision Vandel had seen when he consumed the demon's flesh. He did not for a moment doubt that what Illidan had said was true. The Burning Legion was invincible when opposed by any normal means. There was no defensive strategy that could defeat an army that had unlimited resources and immortal soldiers. The real question was whether Illidan's plan made any difference. For the past few months the Betrayer had seemed even less sane than ever. And now Vandel understood why. All his schemes were nearing a climax.
Illidan did not care about Outland. He did not care about Hellfire Citadel or Coilfang Reservoir. None of it meant anything to him. None of it ever had, save as a stepping-stone to his ultimate destination. Vandel saw what many of the other advisers did not. Illidan had no plan beyond this point. He was standing on the edge of a great abyss, planning on a long leap into darkness. Everything that happened-the taking of citadels, the coming of the Alliance and the Horde-was a sideshow to him. Vandel knew that come what may, all of this was going to go to pieces within the next few months. None of them were going to live much longer. Whether they followed Illidan to Argus or remained here to fight against the Legion or the Alliance and the Horde, it made no difference. They were all going to die. The question then became what gave their deaths the greatest meaning. If what Illidan had said was in the slightest true, there was only one thing to be done. Vandel touched the amulet he had made for Khariel so long ago. He had come here with a purpose in mind. To oppose the Burning Legion and take vengeance if he could. He would see that through to the bitter end. He glanced around at the other demon hunters and saw that they had come to a similar conclusion. The blood elves, as always, looked as if they were thinking of some way to take advantage of the situation. Vandel knew that whatever happened, he would follow Illidan. He glanced over his shoulder into the council chamber. The Betrayer was still there, shoulders slumped, wings wrapped forlornly around them. He paced nine steps and then turned. As if sensing he was watched, Illidan stood taller, flexed his wings, and crossed his arms upon his chest. As the doors slid silently shut, Vandel knew that even their leader was consumed by doubt.
* * *
ILLIDAN CONSIDERED THE SILENT war room. Emptiness made the giant chamber larger. The lack of living sounds turned the place dead. He walked over to the map table and considered the fallen fortresses of his Outland empire. Each of those overturned models and carved blocks represented thousands of deaths, lakes of blood spilled. The thought occurred to him that he had long ago ceased to care about such things. In the game he played, tens of thousands of lost lives were a negligible cost.
There had been a time, long ago, when those deaths would have troubled him. He knew that intellectually, but he no longer felt the emotion, could not even begin to remember what it would have been like, and that bothered him. He had spent so long armoring himself against doubt, forcing himself only to ask questions that were relevant to his struggle. Now, in this empty chamber, he could hear only the echoes of voices no longer speaking. Both Vandel's doubts and Akama's were justified. It was possible he was wrong. It was possible that he was as insane as he had often been accused of being. He picked up one of the pieces-an orc warrior carved from clefthoof ivory-and turned it over and over in his fingers. How many fel orcs had he sent to their deaths without a second thought? He could calculate the number if he wished. His sorcerously trained mind was capable of remembering all of the orders of battle and supply lists. That was not the point. He thought about the demon hunters. They were his own people. He shared a kinship with the elves that he shared with no others, but even that seemed a remote thing. He had walked paths that separated him from even them. He had spent ten thousand years in isolation, with only Maiev and her Watchers for company, and they were mostly distant presences. Ten thousand years alone, with nothing but his thoughts and his plans and his visions. Ten thousand years of dark dreams and testing bonds that could not be broken until finally Tyrande had freed him. He considered visiting Maiev and inflicting a fraction of the punishment she deserved. The chess piece crumbled in his grip. He threw the fragments back down onto the map. There was no time to get distracted now. He had a war to win. Doubts rose to torment him. What if he was wrong? What if he had miscalculated? His visions were not infallible. Perhaps there was another way and he had not seen it. Perhaps he was blind to a possibility that might win this war without all the sacrifices. He had searched and searched for one and had not found it, but that did not mean it was not there. Betrayer. That was what they called him. That was how they would remember him. If they were lucky enough to survive and remember anything, it would be because he had saved them, and they would never know. That thought gave him a moment of dour pleasure. He squared his shoulders, flexed his wings, and strode from the chamber without looking back. It was time to go to Auchindoun and face the spirits of
the restless dead.
* * *
AKAMA STOOD BESIDE MAIEV'S cage. He had dismissed the guards. She had listened to the tale of Akama's last encounter with Illidan, her face becoming ever paler. He was running an awful risk coming here at this time, but he needed to talk with someone who shared his burning hatred of Illidan. Sick horror filled the Broken's heart. The Betrayer planned yet another desecration of a draenei holy place. There was nothing he would not do. Not even the greatest cemetery of Akama's people was safe from Illidan's towering madness. Whatever happened, at whatever cost, Illidan must be stopped. Akama knew that now, felt it with every fiber of his being. Even if it meant risking his soul, it was time to begin his last desperate plan. "He is mad," Maiev said. "He has always been mad. But this is the most insane scheme I have ever heard of. Opening a way to Argus! Are you sure he does not mean to summon reinforcements from there to let him defeat the Alliance and the Horde?" Akama shook his head. "You were not present. You did not hear him speak. He believes in what he says utterly. He plans on going ahead with this scheme. He no longer cares about anything else. For the past few weeks, he has neglected his realm and worked feverishly on this solitary goal, to create this gateway of his. He has woven spell after spell, created astromantic chart after astromantic chart. He has done nothing else, even as his empire crumbled." "Perhaps he plans on using the gateway to escape," Maiev said. A note of worry appeared in her voice, as if she still seriously believed she had a chance of hunting down her prey unaided. "Perhaps he hopes to open a way to some refuge far from here. You should understand that. Your own people did the same." "Illidan is not the sort to flee. I believe he really and truthfully plans to seek out Kil'jaeden and fight him to the death." Maiev's mocking laughter rang out. "He will lose. And all his efforts will go for naught. All your efforts will go for naught as well. Your precious temple will fall to the Alliance or the Horde. Free me. At least if the temple
falls to the Alliance, I will be able to intercede for you and see that it is returned to your people." Akama looked at her and smiled. "There is no need for you to worry on that score. I have made my own plans. All you need do is be patient." "Is that why you have visited me so often, Broken one? Do you still think to use me in your schemes?" "What if I do? What if I could release you from this place and set you on the path to vengeance?" "You have made such promises before." "Ah, but the time was not right then. It is now." Akama walked away, enjoying the thoughtful silence as Maiev considered the implications of his words. In the distance the earth shook as the Hand of Gul'dan erupted. It had been doing that a lot of late. It was an evil omen.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX The Last Month Before the Fall
ASH CRUNCHED BENEATH ILLIDAN'S HOOVES AS HE landed outside the broken gates of Auchindoun. Over him the walls of the mausoleum city towered. They were gray like the surrounding wastes. In the distance, a huge carrioneating bonelasher flapped across the sky. A decrepit clefthoof, its massive strength all but gone, staggered through the waste. The chill wind stirred the dust, sending sandy rivulets trickling. The city looked as if it had once been a massive dome, like the helmet of some titan, but it had been smashed to fragments, scattered across the dry, dead land behind him. He sensed the distant pulse of magic thrumming between the spirit towers that loomed over the Bone Wastes. What purpose did they serve? He was not quite certain, and that disturbed him. He had spent a long lifetime mastering magic, and there were still gaps in his knowledge. Even the fel orcs of the Shadowmoon clan, normally the most fearless and aggressive of creatures, shifted uneasily. There was something about this dead place that penetrated even their rage-filled minds and caused a feeling like dread. That in itself was disturbing, for of all the orcish clans in his service, the Shadowmoon was the most accustomed to necromancy and dark sorcery. Their captain, Grimbak Shadowrage, grunted encouragement at them, and they settled down to await his commands. Illidan's mouth felt dry and his throat constricted. He tasted and smelled something odd, as if tiny particles of bone had infiltrated his nostrils and tickled his tongue. He felt as if bits of all the skeletons buried in the dust had found their way into the air. He ignored the sensation and studied the ruins. Some dreadful disaster had struck the city. That much was clear. Huge gratings of tortured metal emerged from broken stonework, like ribs showing
through the rotting flesh of a corpse. According to Akama, this was a holy site where the bones of dead draenei had been interred. Something had gone wrong, though. There were many and conflicting rumors: that a dark ritual had unleashed the dead; that the orcs had tampered with something best left undisturbed and released forces of great evil; that the Burning Legion had tested some terrible weapon on the place, and the resulting evil energies had warped everything within it. Illidan knew the truth. He had inherited it from Gul'dan's memories when he consumed the power in his skull. The old schemer had dispatched a group of warlocks to the city in search of artifacts buried there. The survivors had told him that something had gone wrong and they had summoned a strange entity. It had shattered Auchindoun, smashing the great dome, scattering the remains of countless dead across a huge area of the desert. Illidan gave the signal to advance. The fel orcs roared a challenge and marched under the shadow of the dead city's gates. The heavy tread of their feet seemed like a desecration of the ancient quiet. In the shadows, old and hungry things watched and waited. It seemed as if a thousand eyes observed them unseen. The dust crunched as they passed beneath a huge arch. It had piled up in drifts that made walking hard for the fel orcs, although he could move across the surface by keeping himself aloft with a simple beat of his wings. The city had been built in concentric rings. Illidan's forces had no sooner passed through the arch than they found themselves confronted by the shattered remains of another wall. Stairs rose ahead. To both right and left, what once must have been a huge street curved away. In the outer walls were many openings that told of ways into the tombs and mausoleums within. Everything had a tumbledown, forlorn look. The wind moaned as it caressed his skin and bulged his wings. He led the fel orcs up worn stairs and passed under all that was left of a triumphal arch. Once through it, they looked down from the top of a wall as wide as a road into another ring of ruins within. Like the rings within a tree, Illidan thought. From where he stood he had a fine view clear across the center of the dead metropolis. The city once must have been built on multiple levels, and this had been one of them. Perhaps it had all been one huge building with many chambers and halls. Now whole floors had tumbled in, to lie on the ground below. It was perplexing. This
place had been built for unknowable reasons to please the alien sensibilities of the draenei. He wanted to reach the very center of the city, but there was going to be no easy way of doing so. He could fly down to the lower level of the central area, but the fel orcs could not go with him, nor could the bearers of the huge casket containing the soul siphon. He pulled his wings tight around him like a cloak against the wind. It felt like a mistake to come here. Nothing good could come of this. One of the scouts returned. A grin of triumph spread across his face. "We have found a way into the crypts, Lord!"
* * *
STRANGE BRAZIERS FLANKED THE archway, illuminating banners containing odd runes. A decomposed skeleton lay near. The air smelled of ancient incense and old bones. Everywhere hung the sick, sweet scents of putrefaction. The throat-tingling itch of corpse dust entered through Illidan's nostrils. As he crossed the threshold of the underground vault, things immediately felt different, as if Illidan had gone through a barrier into some other dimension. The stone braziers glowed a fel green, and ahead the shimmering, near-translucent figure of a draenei spirit stalked forward, empty eyes gazing into oblivion. It looked more sad than frightening, and yet there was something about it that was deeply unsettling. The fel orcs growled threateningly but made no move to attack. What are these ghosts, really? the sorcerer in Illidan wondered. Were they the disembodied spirits of the dead left to wander the world? If so, why did they not remember things and act under their own free will as his spirit did when it moved through the Twisting Nether? The ghost moved backward and forward in a predictable pattern, like some mad, broken thing. Perhaps it was diseased or crazed or had lost something. Perhaps the magic that had turned the mausoleum city into a place of the restless dead had caused this, too. Such speculation would have to wait. It was time to move on. Illidan's force pushed on deeper into a labyrinth of corridors and vaults. Auchindoun was vast and ancient, and the city below was many times larger than that which lay aboveground.
Cobwebs of spectral energy latticed the ceilings. More fel braziers illuminated piles of bones. They lay in great heaps, as if some insane collector had gathered them and tossed them into a jumble. Here and there, shattered paving stones revealed pits in the rock beneath the crypts. In some, nuggets of raw adamantite gleamed. The only living things visible were the fist-sized spiders that scuttled from one shadow to another. Illidan and his troops passed over strange bridges and by huge stone coffins. As they entered a massive chamber, lined by gigantic sarcophagi, Illidan sensed an eerie presence. What had been only an empty archway contained a glowing form resembling that of a draenei. It radiated a cold, life-sucking force. Illidan unleashed a bolt of energy, and the thing disintegrated in the face of his power. As if that were a signal, shimmering figures emerged from the shadows, suddenly just there. They fell upon the fel orcs and were cut to shimmers of ectoplasm by runic weapons and powerful spells. A massive pile of bones sprang up as they passed, knitting themselves together into animated skeletons, their fleshless fingers clutching weapons that perhaps they had borne in life. On ledges around the walls of the vault, robed draenei wove dark magic. Their power connected with unlife, but the ones tapping it were living. Their necromancy drew the dead to life. Illidan dispatched fel orcs to cut them down. Slowly they fought their way into the center of the crypt. As they did so, the silvery, haunting call of horns rang out. It echoed away through the endless corridors. No doubt a warning was being spread. More defenders were being summoned. Good, Illidan thought. All the more to feed to the soul siphon. Illidan's forces continued fighting. Tides of strange spirits roared over them. More and more of the fel orcs went down. It was a pity. Illidan had not yet had time to set up the soul siphon and make their deaths count in the great scheme of things. Here was the place he wanted, though, deep below the city, beneath its endless halls of interred corpses. The fel orcs drew up in ranks around the palanquin containing the soul
siphon. It lay in an elf-sized sarcophagus of brass, fel iron, and truesilver. Illidan sprang into the air, felt a chill wind surge beneath his wings, and landed atop the container. He spoke a word of power and the casket sprang open, revealing the soul siphon. Power pulsed through the fel iron piping, channeled by the runes inscribed in the artifact's side. He was proud of his sorcery. He had managed to recreate some of the magical effects of the ritual used to suck in the souls of the dead and the dying when he opened the portal to Nathreza. When activated, the siphon would sweep the restless spirits haunting Auchindoun into its vortex, disassemble them, and store their power. Three teardrop-like gems lay in the center of the device. Right now the gems were dull and black, but as the siphon filled, they would blaze. When all of them burned, he would have enough power to open the gateway to Argus. He invoked the artifact's might, creating a psychic link between himself and the device. He felt the presence of it in his mind, a yawning abyss, a thing thirsty for power, hungry to devour whatever it encountered. The siphon held a fierce, primitive sentience. The moment he made contact, it began vampirically to drain the life from him. He wove spells of protection and then mastery, binding the entity to his will as he would a demon. More robed draenei arrived, heading companies of walking skeletons. They directed their forces to attack. The fel orcs formed up around Illidan. "Hold them for a few minutes, and triumph will be ours." The fel orcs closed ranks and raised their weapons. Wave after wave of the walking dead threw themselves forward. Individually they were no match for the fel orcs, but they came on in seemingly endless numbers. As they distracted the fel orcs, bolts of shadow magic flew from the necromancers. Worst of all were the spirits. They slithered through unseen, their cold, spectral hands grasping fel orc bodies and sucking the life out of them, leaving chilled corpses to drop to the ground. Illidan continued to wake the soul siphon to its full power. He forced himself to concentrate, knowing that he did not have much time. The fel orcs could not hold up under this pressure for long. Already a few of their corpses responded to sly necromantic sorcery and sprang up to attack their former comrades. The siphon resisted him. Something about his surroundings aided it,
lending power to that which fought against him. He gritted his teeth and howled the words of the spell. Skeletons disintegrated, particles of shadow flowing from them into the maw of the siphon. At first the fel orcs cheered, and then they were too busy fighting for their lives to notice that their spirits were also, upon death, consumed by the magical engine. The tidal wave of oncoming ghosts was sucked in, like water gurgling into a sewer. The siphon exerted its tremendous power, its dark magical energy drawing souls to it like filings to a magnet. The first of the gems on the siphon glowed bright as a demonic sun. A quick glance showed Illidan that almost half of his bodyguards were down. Without his magic to aid them, they were losing the battle. He wanted to join them but he could not; he needed to concentrate on the soul siphon lest it run out of control. If that happened, it might explode, killing them all. He increased the rate of intake, hoping to destroy more of the spirits and gather their power swiftly enough that he could complete the ritual and turn the tide of the battle. Souls screamed into the siphon. The pain of holding the spell was agonizing. Finally the necromancers realized what he was doing. They concentrated their attacks on him. A bolt of magical energy lanced into Illidan's side. Agony so intense that he almost lost control of the siphon smashed through him. He gritted his teeth and forced himself to hold the binding spell in place. The siphon fought against him again. Illidan felt part of his own spirit being drawn into the device. Illidan forced his mind into a warding pattern, resisting the attack, slowing down the drain on his life force. As he did so, he felt his control over the siphon's binding spell begin to slip. The second gem glowed brightly now. Sparks of soul energy surrounded him like a blizzard of black snow. The power roared in, thick and fast. If he could only hold on for a few more moments. His fel orcs were down to a third of their original number now. Grimbak Shadowrage roared encouragement at those remaining. He turned to Illidan, and just for a moment, hope, belief, and entreaty raced across his face before it became once more a snarling warlike mask for the benefit of his soldiers. Illidan considered trying a counterspell against the necromancers but realized it was impossible. He could not hold the soul siphon, protect himself,
and launch an attack at the same time. Even he was not so powerful a magician. Illidan's legs felt rubbery and his head spun. Strength drained out of him faster and faster, and it was all he could do to restrain the growing power of the soul siphon. He had not foreseen this. He had never imagined falling in this dark place. He was going to die here, and all his schemes would come to naught. The best thing to do was simply to release control of the spell restraining the soul siphon, and let its energies explode outward, killing everything around him. At least this way he would have vengeance on his killers. No. He was not going to die. He still had work to do. His destiny must be fulfilled. The Burning Legion must be opposed. He drew on his last reserves of will to keep the soul siphon functioning. He fell to his knees as the life drained out of him. Slowly, the last gem filled. Hold on. Hold on. Agony racked Illidan's body as bolts of dark energy lashed him. Grimbak Shadowrage tumbled to the ground beside him. A few of his bodyguards had made a fighting retreat alongside their captain and shielded him with their own bodies as the walking dead and their sorcerer masters closed in. The final gem was full. Illidan spoke the words that tied off the flow of energy and imprisoned it. He raised himself slowly to his hooves as the last of the fel orcs went down. He gathered what strength was left in him and opened a portal back to the Black Temple. The last thing he heard was the enraged shouting of the necromancers as he and the soul siphon vanished. Chest heaving, he settled himself on the cold stone of his sanctum. Sweat dripped down his brow. He could barely breathe. The room swirled around him and consciousness slipped away.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN One Day Before the Fall
ILLIDAN SAT ON THE THRONE IN HIS COUNCIL chamber. It had been weeks since his return from Auchindoun and still he was weak. His power had not returned to anything like what it had been before his use of the soul siphon. Not for the first time, he considered dispatching an expedition to root out the necromancers. He could not waste the resources. He looked at the great map table. His armies were shattered. His empire, crumbling. Among them, the Alliance, the Horde, and the Burning Legion had riven his Outland realm. It was all his followers could do to hold together the last remaining outposts in Shadowmoon Valley. The reports from his captains, when he had felt well enough to listen, had been very far from encouraging. He had only himself to blame. He had decided to go to Auchindoun accompanied only by his fel orc bodyguards. He had chosen to reserve the power of the demon hunters for the final confrontation, not understanding the very real danger that awaited him in the city of the dead. That overconfidence was going to cost him, and perhaps all who lived, dearly. He pushed the thought aside. He could not afford to let himself think like that. There must be hope, some chance of victory. If he could not win the battle himself, perhaps his demon hunters could. They were powerful, and they had been trained for this fight. It might cost all of their lives, but victory could still be theirs. Keep telling yourself that, and perhaps you might actually come to believe it. The sour thought crept into his mind no matter how much he tried to keep it out. Doubt was a demon against which he had no defense. One by one, his blood elf advisers filtered into the chamber. He could tell by their expressions that the news was not going to be good. He rose from his throne, concealing the pain that hampered his movements as best he could,
but all eyes followed him, measuring and judging. Those present were ruthless, ambitious, and unbound by any conventional ideas of morality. They studied him as wolves might study the ailing leader of their pack. His empire might have shrunk, but it was still an empire, and many others no doubt thought themselves capable of ruling it and even reclaiming what was lost. Perhaps they were right about that. It did not matter. Illidan resented being here, resented having to go through with this charade. Every minute spent placating his advisers was a minute not used finalizing his plans to end the threat of the Burning Legion. He forced himself to look around the room. Every one of those present had to meet the baleful power of his eyeless gaze. High Nethermancer Zerevor spoke first. "The news from the Netherstorm is interesting. Tempest Keep and our treacherous former prince have fallen. Whether this is good or bad for us, I do not know ..." Illidan made an impatient gesture, cutting him off. Kael'thas had sided with Kil'jaeden, so he deserved whatever evil fate had befallen him. He was not worth any more of Illidan's time. He turned to Lady Malande. "And the news from the Blade's Edge Mountains?" "Lord Illidan, Gruul the Dragonkiller has been overthrown. I can find other allies. All it will take is a little more time." Malande was wrong. No allies would be coming from the mountains. Illidan nodded as if he believed her, though. The matter was irrelevant. He needed to get back to building the portal to Argus. He needed to perform the final ritual that would set up the terminus point. "With all respect, Lord Illidan," said Gathios. "Time is just one of the resources we are running short of. We need to mount counterstrikes against both the Alliance and the Horde, teach them to fear us, regain our lost territories." Gathios had been pushing for that for weeks, ever since the extent of the invaders' conquests had become clear. In purely military terms, he was correct. If Illidan's only concern were holding on to Outland, then he should be counterattacking. Although things had probably gone too far for that. They no longer had the forces to fight a war on three fronts. Veras Darkshadow pointed that out, and added, "We could offer an alliance to one side or the other. Play them off against each other. It might buy us some time."
Veras clearly thought he knew what Illidan wanted to hear. It was also something that Zerevor and Malande would disagree with. The blood elves fell to arguing. In his mind Illidan reviewed the plans for the portal to Argus. There was still too much work to do. He needed more truesilver for the inlays. He needed to reinforce the dampening spells that would feed power from the soul siphon to the portal itself. There would need to be ways of making sure that the flow of energy was even and swift, that the gate opened smoothly. He needed the visualization to be absolutely clear. Nothing could go wrong. There would only be one chance to get this right. At the moment, as things stood, he might be able to open the gateway, but it could not stay open without a guiding will to keep it stable. He needed to find a way to ensure that it would remain steady once they passed through it. There was so much to be done. "What do you think, Lord?" Gathios asked. "What should we do?" Suddenly he was tired of all this. He was tired of listening to this petty, pointless bickering over matters that were no longer of any concern to him. He was tired of the feeling of weakness and lassitude that filled him. Time was running out and he had important work to do and this was a needless distraction. Illidan dismissed them with a wave of his hand. "Get out of my sight," he said.
* * *
ILLIDAN LOOKED AROUND the great chamber of transference. Day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, he had created the last and greatest portal spell he would ever weave. Every line had been etched in the floor by his own hand. He had boiled the alembics of truesilver himself and filled out line after line. He had inscribed the runes around the edges in demon ichor mixed with his own blood. Each wall was covered in intricate warding symbols based on his tattoos. At junctions in the pattern, he had placed the skulls of demons and sorcerers, each etched with miniature versions of their section of the pattern to help channel the flow of energy. These additions reflected the star beacons in the sky over Argus. At the center of the weave lay the Seal of Argus. It pulsed with power now, a direct link to the world of Kil'jaeden that would guide the unleashed energies of the portal.
Everything still had an unfinished, incomplete look to it. The spell engines that would feed power from the soul siphon into the pattern were untested. The generators, great machines of copper and brass and fel iron, intricate as gnomish engines, stood almost ready. The whole vast pattern was falling into place but too slowly. He had strengthened his weakened body with magic to give him the energy and concentration of a dozen lesser sorcerers, but it was still not enough. It would take many more moons to complete sorcery so vast and intricate, and he could feel the sands running through his life's hourglass far too quickly. Now was not the time to allow himself to panic. Impatience led to mistakes, and in an undertaking as complex as this one, the slightest error could lead to catastrophe. He needed just to focus on the matter at hand, to do what must be done this day, this hour, this minute. He needed to complete the link between Outland and Argus. He must set the terminal runes. He placed the incense and invoked the spell. One by one the magical engines sprang to life, filling the air with the stench of ozone and brimstone. Tiny trickles of energy, the slightest breath of power compared with the great roaring gale that would mark the portal's opening, leapt from the engines. The lines of truesilver shimmered. A mirror image of their pattern appeared in the air above them, projected from the Seal of Argus. He let his spirit exit his weary body. It was easier to let go, as if using the soul siphon in Auchindoun had somehow weakened the link between his spirit and his flesh. He reached out and wove the flows of energy from the pattern into subtle threads, then gathered them to his spirit. He followed the intricate pattern of runes out into the Twisting Nether. His spirit flashed through the void, and once again, Argus appeared beneath him. He looked down on the once glittering and beautiful world, then sent his spirit soaring downward into its glass canyons and diamond-edged mountains. He moved as cautiously as he could. This time he sought to establish a terminal point for the portal. A web of magical energy linked him to Outland. He had done his best to conceal it, but a sufficiently adroit sorcerer-and this was a world full of them-might still detect him unless he was extremely careful. The thought of the being he had encountered last time troubled him. It had seemingly aided him, but he knew how subtle and cunning the demons of the
Burning Legion could be. Kil'jaeden was well named the Deceiver. Illidan flew closer to the palace city where the demonic rulers of the Burning Legion dwelled. He feared that his comet trails of magic leading back to Outland might be spotted no matter how thin they were, no matter how well he had concealed them. He slowed his advance to a crawl. A tingling of his spectral senses warned him that he was under observation. He tried to track whatever spied on him, but it eluded his perception. Alarm pulsed through his mind. The fact that it could elude his powers of observation even when he was alert spoke of tremendous sorcerous ability. The thing might attack him by surprise while he was most vulnerable, placing the points of resonance for the portal. He waited for long moments, but nothing happened. Perhaps he was caught up in the backwash of some defensive spell designed to induce paranoia and doubt. Kil'jaeden was capable of such subtle magic. Every moment Illidan spent here was a moment wasted, one that increased his chances of being discovered. He needed to either proceed with his plan or retreat and wait for a more auspicious time. It was now or never. He plunged toward Kil'jaeden's enormous crystalline palace, found the part he was looking for, and wove the spells. A small, temporary whirlwind of force appeared, a tiny echo of the vast pattern back in the Black Temple. Illidan glanced around, waiting for the hammer to fall. If he had been detected, now would be the time. No ward spell sprang to life. No alarm triggered. The vortex faded virtually to nonexistence, leaving behind a well-nigh undetectable residue of power. As it did so, Illidan thought he was under observation once more. The sense of the watching presence returned, intensified. He felt as if something looked upon his action with immense curiosity, but when he sought out the source, he could not find it. Wait. What was that? That faint aura of shimmering light. He focused on it, but even as he did so, it vanished from his perception-as if the owner had somehow withdrawn below the skin of the universe. He needed to concentrate on the work at hand. He was distracted when he could least afford to be. He flitted through the crystalline palace to a new location, a vast chamber in which succubi danced for the amusement of demonic generals. He invoked the portal-anchoring spell once more, fixing it
in place as swiftly as he could. He was closer to the throne room of Kil'jaeden now, and the danger of detection increased with that nearness. He felt as if something vast and powerful loomed behind him, watching him work, studying the way he invoked the spell, observing how the anchor fell into place. He dared not interrupt the casting to try to catch it, otherwise the whole ritual would fail. It was all he could do to focus on the work at hand when, at any moment, a blast of power might cast him into oblivion. He forced himself to concentrate on completing the anchoring spell, then swiftly attempted to bring his observer into view. Once again it eluded him. Even in the reduced emotional state that came with being in spirit form, he was angry. He did not like being toyed with, and he felt that this was what was happening now. Kil'jaeden knew he was here and was playing with him. He was being allowed to get near the completion of his spell-and at the last moment his spirit would be captured and imprisoned. He had only three more anchors to set, and one way or another the thing would be over. Part of him wanted to attempt an escape or draw his attacker out and get into battle, no matter how one-sided that conflict might prove to be. The next two anchor points went down easily. Each time he felt himself observed, and he sensed the same deep curiosity about what he was doing radiating from the hidden watcher, but try as he might he could not find any way to make the creature reveal itself. Now he moved cautiously closer to the great throne room. An enormous concentration of demonic power lay there. Kil'jaeden was in residence, and many of his generals were there, too. Illidan needed to be extraordinarily cautious now. In his spirit form, that assembled force could crush him as if he were an insect. All of them were, without a doubt, sorcerers capable enough to detect him unless he shielded himself with supreme skill and laid the anchoring spell with the utmost care. He paused again, silently cursing his hidden observer, knowing that the attack would soon come, raging at the futility of what he was attempting but realizing he had no other choice. Perhaps another might be able to complete his great work even if he was captured here. It was the most forlorn of hopes. There were few sorcerers of sufficient skill in Azeroth or Outland, and they
would be most unlikely to finish his work. What else could he do, though? He had come this far. He needed to continue. He steeled himself and invoked the last anchor for the spell. This was the most dangerous moment. Instead of simply taking form and fading, this vortex sent out a pulse of force, leaping to the farthest anchor and then the next, forming a great pentacle and then filling in the complex web of runes until it had replicated the magical energy of the pattern in his sanctum in Outland. The principle of harmonic resonance established a connection between the two great symbols. Despite his wariness, he felt a flush of triumph. The link between Argus and Outland was established. The portal could be activated once the pattern was finished. He had but a heartbeat to enjoy his victory, and then the attack came. The power of it was astonishing. His spirit form was swept up like an infant being snatched by an orc. He was like a swimmer caught in an oceanic undertow. No matter how much he struggled, he could not break free. He stopped, determined to preserve his strength for when the worst came. He emerged onto a plain of Light. Before him glittered a being of perfect geometric lines. They twisted in a way that made them seem to disappear and reappear a moment later in a completely different arrangement. It baffled his brain trying to follow the changes. Illidan braced himself to unleash the most destructive spell he could in spirit form, but the creature did not attack. He realized he had seen its like before, in the Terrace of Light in Shattrath. If anything, this creature was possessed of even more power than A'dal and its followers. "You are a naaru," Illidan said eventually, when he wearied of the silence. "I am an elder naaru. Possibly the eldest now remaining in these universes." "Why are you here? Do you serve Sargeras or Kil'jaeden?" Gentle mirth emanated from the naaru. Sparkles of light shifted around its form, like the notes of laughter made visible. "I do not." A faint sense of relief swept over Illidan. It might be a trick, though, meant to take him off guard. "Then what are you doing here?" "Waiting for you." "You knew I would come?"
"You or someone like you was bound to. The universe throws up champions in the face of those who would destroy it." "It could perhaps have picked a better one." The words emerged from his mouth before he could stop them. "I do not think so. You are what you are. All your days have forged you into that. A weapon aimed at the heart of a great demon." "I would like to think I am somewhat more sentient than my warglaives." "That is what makes you dangerous." "So the universe has anointed me to slay Kil'jaeden." His tone was sardonic, but hope flickered inside Illidan. Perhaps, if what this naaru said was true, there was some chance of victory after all. The swirl of lights indicated a negative. "No. Your enemy is far greater than Kil'jaeden. Greater even than Sargeras and his Burning Legion." "Wonderful," Illidan said. "As if they were not strong enough." The suspicion that this was all a subtle, mocking trap set by Kil'jaeden sidled once more into his mind. He fought down bitterness. It seemed as if all his sacrifices had gone for naught. If this was a trap, his struggle was ended. If it was not, then things were even worse than he had thought. "The Void is a more potent foe by far than the Burning Legion. It is the ultimate opponent of the Light. It will take all the peoples of Azeroth and Outland united to oppose it." The naaru stopped pulsing. "You do not believe me? You lose faith and hope. Then know this." Before Illidan could defend himself in any way, a bolt of pure Light blasted from the naaru. It struck his empty eye sockets and filled them with a golden glow. Illidan braced himself for a blast of agony that did not come. In the past such magic had always racked him with pain. It would normally have done the same to any user of fel magic. His vision shimmered and faded, and he found himself looking down on a terrible battlefield. Amid mountains of corpses, a winged figure battled at the head of the legions of Light. A golden glow surrounded his warglaives. He cleft demons asunder with mighty blows. The soldiers surrounding him gazed up in awe and wonder at their leader. It took Illidan a moment to realize that this being's features were his own, transformed, his eyes glowing fiercely. This avatar of the Light looked calm and strong and at peace. His face was filled with confidence, shorn of all suffering. As Illidan watched, the winged figure rose above the battle, defying
gigantic entities of darkness, creations of the evil of the Void. A halo played around his head. His body began to glow brighter than the sun, and from his outstretched arms, rays of Light emerged to strike down his foes. There was a sense of rightness about this, as if he looked upon a vision of the unborn future. For a moment he could believe in it, but then his doubts rushed back. This could not be true. It was not any path he had ever set out on. It was not who he was. He was a fighter and a killer, as driven by darkness and his own desires as he was by any urge to do right. "You will defy death," the naaru's voice said as the vision faded. "I have seen this. Whatever you were, whatever you are, a champion of Light is what you will be." There was utter certainty in the naaru's voice, and it communicated itself to Illidan. For a moment, he felt the Light embrace him, and his heart was at rest. He had been given a vision of redemption beyond any he had hoped for. Peace filled him as he communed silently with the naaru. The moment lasted only a heartbeat, but when it ended, Illidan felt as if it might have been a lifetime. "You will be a hero," said the naaru. "But there will be a price." "There always is."
* * *
THE MOMENT ENDED. Illidan stood, suffused by a feeling of peace. The lattice of Light, the shimmering plain, faded, and Argus appeared around him and the naaru. It had always been there, he realized. The reality he had stood within with the being was entirely a product of its power, an illusion. Sudden fear stabbed at him. He might have been detected. The minions of the Burning Legion could be closing in. Whether the naaru was friendly or not, it was placing both of them in danger. "Farewell," the naaru said. A limb of Light flickered out of its body and touched Illidan on the forehead. He felt a sense of contact, as if another tattoo had been added to his flesh. It burned strangely, at war with the fel power contained within his other tattoos; then it merged with them and disappeared. The contact was broken, and the naaru vanished from his sight as if it had never been. The image of himself transformed once again played through his mind. Could it be true? Was there really a path to redemption for him? He
had never dared think such a thing was possible, and yet the naaru believed it would be so. It believed in him. Just for a moment, he let himself believe, too. Then he pushed the thought to one side, for future consideration. There was still work to be done. Illidan studied the anchor points of the portal. He could just sense them, and he knew they were there. Hopefully they would remain hidden from any demon who sought them. It was time to go. He had been here too long. He ended the spell of astral travel, and his spirit hurtled through the Twisting Nether and thundered back into his body. In front of his forehead, visible to his spectral senses, a rune floated. He knew its blaze mirrored the mark the naaru had left on him. Even as that realization hit him, the rune faded into invisibility, vanished as if the encounter had never happened. He paused to recollect the meeting, using every trick of memory his sorcerer's mind possessed. It had been real, he felt certain, and the vision the naaru had given him felt true. Of course, that meant nothing if the creature was playing games with his mind. But if it was powerful enough to do that ... One could go mad thinking about such things. As he adjusted to being corporeal once more, he heard the banging on the door, audible even through the spells of warding and protection he had set. He spoke the words that unlocked the sanctum, and the door slid open to reveal his advisers standing there. "Lord Illidan," said High Nethermancer Zerevor. "You must come with us to see what is happening for yourself. The Black Temple is under attack." There was an urgency in his voice that kept Illidan from dismissing him out of hand. Illidan rose from his posture of meditation and moved to accompany them. It was only then that it occurred to him that one of his advisers was missing. Where was Akama?
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT One Day Before the Fall
MAIEV LOOKED UP TO SEE AKAMA STANDING IN the doorway of her cage once more. "Have you come to dangle vain promises before me again?" she asked. It was difficult to keep the bitterness from her voice. Akama limped closer, tilted his head to one side, and gazed up into her face. Such was his intensity that she grew uncomfortable, although she refused to show it. "No," he said. His tone revealed both his weariness and his fear. "How are you feeling? Strong?" "Let me out of this cage and I will show you." Maiev had spent the previous months conserving her strength. She was sure she had never been mightier, but still the spells binding her held. "Do you remember how to hold a blade?" Akama asked. Maiev was about to pour scorn on his head, but something in his manner stopped her. "That is not something I could ever forget." "I hope so," said Akama. "Why are you here?" "The Horde and the Alliance besiege the Temple of Karabor. They have made common cause with the Aldor and the Scryers. Even some of the naaru are present." There was a sense of finality. "Has the Betrayer sent you to kill me? Does he lack the courage to do it himself?" Akama raised a stubby finger to his lips. The Ashtongue leader considered his words and, just for a moment, allowed himself the tiniest of smiles. "You are not that important to him. Even as his empire descends into fire and ruin, he appears more concerned with other things. Fortunately for you and for me."
Maiev allowed herself to hope. She kept her features absolutely calm and cold. She did not want to give her enemies the satisfaction of seeing that they had gotten to her. "You think he will be brought down, then?" "Who knows? Even now he is the mightiest being in Outland, surrounded by lieutenants of near-equal power. The temple is a fortress unparalleled in this world. He might hold out there for years. His enemies might fall out among themselves. I have known him for too long to think his downfall will be easy." "And yet you think he might be overthrown." "A small force of sufficient power could infiltrate the temple, if they were given the appropriate aid." "And of course you are in a position to give such aid. Forgive me if I have some trouble believing you. I seem to have heard a story like this before. Last time this tale did not turn out so well for me or those with me. Or your people, either, if my memory serves me correctly." Akama had the grace to look ashamed, but he still met her gaze. "This time, one way or another, there will be a different ending." "I do not believe you." "I can convince you." "How?" Maiev put all the scorn she could muster into her voice, but she could not help but feel hope rising in her breast. "Stand back," Akama said. He waited for her to do so and then invoked a powerful stream of magic. The locking spells fell away. Unable to quite believe what she was seeing, Maiev pushed the door of her cell. It swung open. She was tempted to spring on Akama and wring his treacherous neck, but she was unarmed and he was still powerful. She did not doubt that he had bodyguards within call. "If you are playing with me, ancient one, I will kill you." The words escaped her lips before she could stop them. "You might find that difficult to do without weapons and armor," Akama said. "I trust you are going to rectify that immediately." "You trust correctly. This time."
* * *
MAIEV PULLED ON HER gauntlets, then raised her helm and placed it on her head as if it were a crown. A complex weave of protective magic sprang into being around her. She breathed a sigh of relief. She had power now, and she was not going to let herself be imprisoned again. This time, if it was a trap, she would force them to kill her. Akama stood nearby in the guardroom, holding her umbra crescent. Maiev had noticed the demon corpses on the way. All that remained of her jailors were Ashtongue. The demons were dead. That was a pity. She would have liked to kill the abominations herself. She held out her hand in an imperious gesture, demanding her weapon. Akama looked down at it, as if guessing what the first thing she would do when she got it in her hands would be. "Are you frightened I am going to kill you?" "I am frightened you are going to try." "And why should I not?" "Because you are not stupid. Let us not play games with each other, Maiev Shadowsong. You are free because I have set you free. You can indulge a childish thirst for revenge or you can help me overthrow our true enemy." "I can do both." "No. You cannot. I alone can get you into the Temple of Karabor. I alone can guide you to the Betrayer. Decide now whom you wish to kill. Me or him. That is your choice." "Why should I believe you this time?" "Because I am risking more than my life to free you. I am risking my soul and my people. I have kept you alive for a purpose, Maiev Shadowsong. I have hoarded your life as if it were my greatest treasure. Follow me this day and you will face Illidan and perhaps conquer him. Kill me and you can walk free, but you may never get another chance to slay the Betrayer. Which is it going to be?" Without saying another word, Akama thrust the blade into her hand. He stood watchful and ready. Maiev felt the weight of the weapon. She turned it over and over. If any spells booby-trapped it, she could not see them. She was tempted for a moment to stab Akama in his treacherous heart, but she restrained herself. "You may have your life. I will have justice from Illidan."
"No," said Akama. "You will have vengeance on him. I think that will give you more satisfaction."
* * *
ILLIDAN LOOKED OUT FROM the battlements. A seething ocean of armored flesh broke against the walls of the Black Temple. Spells surged toward the defensive wards. Thousands of soldiers pressed forward to do battle with his demons. He sensed the presence of more than just mortals down there. He discerned the pulsing of naaru. So much for the promises the elder naaru had made back on Argus. It looked as if only one of them had faith in his destiny. The beings down there were certainly against him. Illidan shrugged his shoulders. His wings rose, emphasizing the gesture. "It matters not." His councilors looked shocked. One or two of them smiled and tried to put a brave face on things, as if they believed that he had a plan that could save them. "We trust in your judgment, Lord," said Gathios the Shatterer. "Trust in the walls of the Black Temple," Illidan replied, "and in your own spells and blades. Go below and prepare for battle. I do not think our new guests will be leaving anytime soon, and we should ready a proper reception for them." Illidan considered ordering that Maiev be executed before she could be rescued. It would be a small morsel of vengeance, perhaps the only one he would get. Who would do it? Akama, perhaps. Where was the Broken? Illidan invoked the spell he had used upon the leader of the Ashtongue. It was still in place. The shade was bound and could be unleashed if it should prove necessary. There was a certain satisfaction to be had in knowing it was so. No. He would not kill Maiev yet, not while there was still a chance she could be made to suffer. A group of draenei paladins in the tabard of the Alliance charged down the road toward the gates of the Black Temple. Of course, those sanctimonious oafs would be leading the charge. They believed in opposing evil wherever they found it, and he fit into their simple-minded view of what evil was. To them he even looked the part. A mass of his demonic guardians raced to meet them. Magical hammers clashed against fel weapons. It was difficult to see
who had won amid the swirling melee; then the Alliance soldiers were thrown back. A company of brutish-looking Horde trolls moved to reinforce the paladins. Among them flitted shadowy figures who struck with astonishing power and deadliness when the demons' backs were turned. Illidan could see the shimmer of spells concealing them. Apparently his demonic allies could not. It looked as if the attackers would prevail-but then a shower of meteors crashed into the ground around the combat and broke asunder, revealing themselves to be infernals. One of the warlocks within the temple had taken a hand. Illidan took stock of the situation. The temple was well supplied, and the sorcerers within it could summon demonic aid almost indefinitely. But there were magi out there among the attackers, and others who could counter his warlocks. Plumes of dust in the distance announced the arrival of reinforcements for the attackers. They had the advantage of numbers, and that was only likely to keep growing. The Alliance and the Horde had the resources of a world to draw on, and armies that had been honed in endless battles. Their presence beyond his walls showed exactly how strong they had grown. He studied his own defenses. In the training grounds, the Dragonmaw clan orcs had gathered. Overhead their dragons flew in formation. Their armies mustered in companies around the siege engines. At the entrance to the Sanctuary of Shadows, Supremus stood. The abyssal loomed over even the gigantic Illidari fearbringers who stalked through the courtyard, wings flapping, weapons held at the ready. Any attacker who got beyond Supremus would have to enter the Sanctuary of Shadows and face more bound demons and sorcerers. And beyond them, layer after layer of defenses waited. Illidan returned to contemplating the assaulting army. A huge disturbance loomed around the gates. Enormous battering rams rolled forward, propelled by sorcery. Wave after wave of Aldor and Scryer troops did battle with his demonic defenders. It did not matter how strong his defenses were. Enough force was being brought to bear that the temple would eventually fall. Deceiver, they called Kil'jaeden. It seemed he had deceived them all once
again. He had not committed his own forces here because he knew he did not have to. His enemies could only be weakened by fighting each other. When this battle was over, the Legion would intervene and destroy them. By defending the temple strongly, Illidan was only doing Kil'jaeden's work for him. But what else could he do? Surrender would serve no purpose. His enemies were sworn to slay him. He just needed to hold on until the portal was complete, and then ... Illidan had made a mistake, concentrating all his attention on the Burning Legion and the quest for Argus. His wings curled tightly around his form for a moment until he forced them to relax. This was a sideshow. The Black Temple was the greatest fortress in Outland. He had time to complete the creation of the gateway to Argus. He needed to make a start now.
* * *
ILLIDAN RETURNED TO HIS casting chamber. His head ached. His body felt weak. Doubts assailed him from every side. Did he really have enough time to complete the gate? What if the forces besieging his citadel found a weak spot in the defenses? What if he had miscalculated even that? There was still the way in through the sewers. He should reinforce High Warlord Naj'entus with more naga and elementals. He studied the half-complete pattern. It would have been his masterpiece. He picked up the Skull of Gul'dan and turned it over and over in his hands. Is this how you felt at the end, old orc? Defeated before you could even start? He walked to the edge of the pattern, studied symbols inscribed in his own blood, read the messages of power there that were almost ready to spring to life and open a passage across the entire face of the universe. He had thought he had factored everything into his plan. He had thought he had time. He turned the skull so that he looked into its empty eye sockets. Its death's-head grin mocked him. He remembered the vision the naaru had given him. Was that a mockery, too? He tightened his grip on the skull, almost ready to crush it into tiny pieces.
This was not over. He would rally the defenses of the Black Temple. If need be, he could provide an anchor for the gateway himself. He could hold a way open by pure force of will if he had to. He was not going to fail now at this final hurdle. He would strike at the heart of the Burning Legion, no matter what it cost.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE The Day of the Fall
MAIEV INSPECTED THE IMMENSE WALLS OF THE Black Temple. The fortress loomed over them, radiating terrible strength. Huge stone spikes emerged from the walls like blades thrusting at the sky. Akama looked upon the structure as one dying of thirst in the desert might gaze upon a fountain of sparkling water. Hope and desperation warred in his eyes. He completely ignored the sights and sounds of the battle going on nearby. He had eyes only for the holy place itself. Maiev could not ignore the war raging all around her. Already the combined forces of the Aldor and the Scryers had begun the assault that would provide cover for Akama's attempt to infiltrate the Black Temple. Bitterness ate at her heart as the naaru Xi'ri wove spells of protection around her, Akama, and his new allies from Azeroth. The Sha'tar had not consented to aid her when she had gone after Illidan. Things might have turned out differently on the Hand of Gul'dan if they had. Her companions might still be alive. Maiev glanced at the Azerothian adventurers. She sensed their power and their nervousness. They had been secretly aiding Akama for weeks, acting as his agents to perform missions he could not. Now they were preparing to strike at Illidan himself. The prospect of infiltrating the Black Temple excited and scared them. Maiev herself could barely wait for the naaru to finish weaving its spells. The hour of her vengeance was almost at hand. This time the Betrayer would not escape. Nearby she sensed the terrible presence of demons. Their brimstone scent filled the air, along with the stink of burning flesh and opened entrails. Something in it stirred her to the core. This was the scent of a battle worth fighting in, a war for the fate of worlds.
She shaded her eyes and watched a company of Aldor rush by the glittering form of a naaru on their way to engage a force of batwinged demons. Spells blazed through the air; enchanted weapons bit home. The Illidari were pushed back. Spectators jeered from the walls of the Black Temple. Overhead, huge nether drakes circled. A wing of them hurtled in, breathing clouds of devastating arcane magic. She stood on the open ground and defied them to hurt her. In her armor, she was all but invulnerable to their attacks. She felt the naaru's power complete its weave around her, setting the air to shimmer. The earth shook as another wave of meteorites smashed home and another wave of infernals clambered from the craters they made. Dust devils arose over the site of the battle. A troop of riders charged past to enter the fray. Akama gestured to her. "Now is the time, Maiev! Unleash your wrath!" Maiev smiled as she raced forward. Behind her rushed Akama and his Azerothian allies and a strong force of Aldor and Scryers. Ahead she could see the seething mass of demons that filled the killing fields before the walls of the temple. Satyrs, felguard, and worse things charged to meet her. Exultant, she shouted, "I've waited for this moment for years. Illidan and his lapdogs will be destroyed!" Ahead winged dreadlords emerged from the murk of battle. They towered above her, filled with fel power. She aimed her umbra crescent at the nearest and slashed through his flesh, cleaving off part of a wing and then a leg. The demon crashed to the ground, and she leapt upon his back and drove her blade so far through his spine that the point was buried in the earth. As the demon's life ebbed away, she pulled her weapon clear and blinked herself behind another, calling on Elune to aid her as she smote the creature. The air crackled with magical energy as Akama and his other allies unleashed a torrent of spells. The dreadlords and their lesser demons fell before the savage onslaught, but more and more entered the fray. Fel magic pulsed in the air as a portal opened nearby. A huge nathrezim emerged from it. She recognized his massive crimson form. It was Vagath, one of the worst of the jailors Illidan had set for her. She remembered all his promises of torment. Somehow he had escaped the slaughter at her prison. She would ensure that he did not get away this time. Akama bellowed, "Slay all who see us! Word must not get back to
Illidan." Maiev sprang forward, lashing out at the nathrezim. They exchanged blows. Vagath was strong but Maiev was stronger. She drove her blade through the heavy armor encasing the dreadlord's chest. "Meet your end, demon!" Vagath looked down in disbelief. Akama limped over to Maiev's side. Vagath fixed his gaze on the Ashtongue leader and, with his dying breath, said, "You've sealed your fate, Akama. The master will learn of your betrayal!" Akama shook his head. "Akama has no master, not anymore." As the words left his mouth the portal pulsed once more. A tidal wave of demons surged forth. The sight of them filled Maiev with terrible wrath. She threw herself among them, striking left and right, cleaving through them like the prow of a ship through the waves of a bloody sea. The enemy closed in all around her, seeking to drag her down into their midst. Felsteel axes glanced off her armor. Demonic claws bit into her chest plate. She unleashed the full fury of her blade, knowing she needed to close the portal through which the demons poured or her mission would fail before it began. Behind her she thought she heard Akama give the order to enter the Black Temple. It seemed she was going to have to close the portal alone.
* * *
VANDEL LOOKED OUT THROUGH the murder hole deep within the walls of the Black Temple. He took a sip of the ethermead he had acquired from the blood elf revelers on the Grand Promenade. It tingled pleasantly on his tongue. Another massive battle had erupted outside the gates. Glancing down, he saw a force of Scryers and Aldor charge into combat with the guardian demons. Huge clouds of dust rose, obscuring the conflict. He caught glimpses of the battle through them. A blood elf warrior fell to a satyr. An Aldor priest blasted a felguard with the blinding power of the Light. There was something oddly thrilling about watching the fight, like having an arena seat for the end of the world.
He saw that the servants of the naaru appeared to be aiding a group of Broken-and could that be ... Akama? Rumor claimed that the old Broken had vanished, that he had gone over to the other side and was even now out there plotting the Black Temple's downfall with the leaders of the Aldor and the Scryers. It appeared that rumor was correct. Small dribbles of rage erupted from the demon inside Vandel. Flickering memories of battles and kills came to him. He suppressed them easily enough. Some anger remained when he watched the attacking forces gather. The fools. Did they not realize what was going on here? They thought they had come to attack the demon ruler of Outland. They had no clue. Ah, but it was an easy enough mistake to make. Looking down at the bound demons defending the temple, Vandel could see how the invaders could think like that. Illidan had never taken any time to explain his purpose to anyone outside his immediate circle. Not that it would have mattered. Most likely no one would have believed him if he had. They would simply have thought it was part of some cunning scheme. Perhaps it was. Even now, after all Vandel had seen, all he had done, and all he had been through, he was not sure of that. Who really knew what went on in the Betrayer's mind? He took another sip of the ethermead and watched the pyrotechnic blast of spells claw away at the wards on the walls. How long would it be until the demon hunters were called upon to fight?
* * *
AKAMA LED HIS SMALL force toward the walls of the Temple of Karabor. In the distance Maiev battled to close the demonic portal. He prayed she was successful, at least for as long as it would take for him and his companions to enter the temple. All around, demons made war with servants of the Light. Behind him, he sensed the heartbreaking presence of the naaru. It reminded him of all he had turned his back on when he had entered the Betrayer's service, all he had lost and hoped to regain.
He looked at the eager faces of his allies from Azeroth, the trusting expressions of his Broken bodyguards. He inspected the hollow places within himself where once fragments of his soul had been. He had not felt whole for so long. He would rather die than continue this way. Which was good, because that was exactly what would happen if things went wrong. In fact, that would be the best thing that would happen. Still, these last few moons the lord of Outland had been distracted, caught up in his mad, grandiose plan. If plan it was. Even now, Akama was not sure whether the Betrayer was serious about opening a gateway to Argus, or whether it was all part of some great deception. Since Illidan had used the capture of Maiev to conceal the opening of the gateway to Nathreza, Akama was not inclined to take anything he said on faith. Akama remembered all the Broken and draenei slain in the opening of that gateway, their souls consumed, and all the draenei souls that met the same fate in Auchindoun. He would allow no chance for Illidan to repeat those abominations. Felsteel bars and wards protected the sewer outflow. Those were the least of the defenses. Far worse lay beyond. Akama wove the spell that would open the way, and stepped through. Ahead lay the sewers of the Black Temple. The path led up through a long rocky defile and then emerged into a chamber full of elementals and naga. Somewhere in the distance, he heard the naga champion High Warlord Naj'entus's roar. He hoped his people were ready.
* * *
AS HIS SPIRIT HOVERED over the pattern, Illidan became aware of a banging on the door of the sanctum and a female voice screaming for his attention. They were audible through the ears of his body, which lay beneath him. He let his spirit drop back into his flesh and surveyed his surroundings. He spoke the words of opening, and the seal on the entrance was removed. Lady Malande stood before him, looking at the vast shape of the pattern with something like wonder in her eyes. "Lord Illidan," she said. "An enemy force is within the gates. High Warlord Naj'entus has fallen at the entrance to the sewers. The enemy is on the move."
It took Illidan a few moments to register her words. Naj'entus had been set along with a small army to watch over the sealed entrance to the sewers. Illidan had sent reinforcements. The naga champion and his forces should have been able to fend off a legion. Something had gone very badly wrong. Treachery. The temple had been betrayed from within. Perhaps it was the blood elves or Akama's people. It looked as if time had run out. Illidan picked up the Skull of Gul'dan. Its smile mocked him once more. There was only one thing left to do. He would need the power of the soul siphon. There was still a use he could put it to.
CHAPTER THIRTY The Day of the Fall
MAIEV STOOD ATOP A MOUNTAIN OF DEMON corpses. Her breath thundered from her chest. The thrill of victory blazed within her heart. She had closed the portal and stopped the seemingly endless tide of demons. She only wished that there were more. She would have stacked their corpses as high as the walls and entered the temple that way instead of through the sewers as Akama had planned. A huge surge of familiar energy pulsed deep within the temple. No! She knew what that meant. She had felt its like before on the slopes of the Hand of Gul'dan. Somewhere within his fortress, Illidan was opening another portal, far greater than the one that Vagath had come through. Ominous energy filled the air as the rent in the fabric of reality widened. Perhaps the Betrayer was summoning some new demon from the depths of the Twisting Nether. Most likely he was planning on escape. She could not let that happen again. She needed to get inside the Black Temple now. She would end this thing today. She used her power to blink swiftly across the battlefield and through the passageway into the sewers. Illidan would not elude justice this time.
* * *
VANDEL WATCHED AS THE silver-armored figure completed the slaughter of an army of demons. He recognized her from the tales he had heard of the battle at the Hand of Gul'dan. Maiev Shadowsong was loose. That should not have been possible. She was bound in Warden's Cage, guarded by demons, rings of terrible warding spells woven around her. Akama must have freed her.
Come to me now, my demon hunters. The voice echoed within Vandel's head. It was a summoning on a primal level. It vibrated through his tattoos and bored into his brain with a compulsion that was all but irresistible. Along with the summons came the knowledge of where he had to go, a place deep within the fortress, close to the council chamber. He pulled himself away from the viewpoint in the wall and raced toward the distant stairwell. All around him, he could see the signs of activity. Troops ran to defensive positions. Horns sounded and drums rumbled in the depths. These were warning signs. Somewhere the temple defenses had been breached. He heard the sounds of combat in the distance. The demon urged him to race toward it, to take part in the killing, to reap souls. Come to me now, my demon hunters. Once again the command rang out. This time he felt it shivering through his very bones. Was this how a demon felt when it was summoned from the Twisting Nether? Drawn and compelled by forces it did not understand but struggled to resist? Why was he even resisting? The voice was Illidan's and it contained such urgency that Vandel almost wept. Somewhere deep within the temple, potent energies stirred. Vandel recognized them. A gate was being opened, but to where, he could not tell. Did Illidan plan an escape? Or was the opening created by his enemies? Perhaps traitors within the fortress were summoning aid from elsewhere. Perhaps Illidan himself had opened the portal. The energies of this gate felt very much like those of the one that had led to Nathreza. Had Illidan finally opened the path to Argus? There was only one way Vandel was going to find out. Somewhere in the darkness, he sensed other demon hunters moving, felt the presence of their inner demons. He cursed. It seemed that his curiosity about the attack had put him the farthest away from their master. He leapt as he reached the top of the stairs. Come to me now, my demon hunters. The voice boomed within his skull like the tolling of a great bell; then its echoes slowly died away, leaving him feeling alone. The sense of a summoning deep within the temple intensified. The way to somewhere else lay open, but he knew beyond a shadow of a
doubt that it would soon close and that any chance of him reaching the portal would be gone. He took the stairs ten at a time, bounding down them with the agility of a panther, tumbling headlong, rolling to his feet, taking advantage of the force of gravity to increase his velocity. Urgency burned within his brain, compelled him to rush. It was not just fear. Not just the sense that the temple was on the verge of falling. It was an overwhelming feeling that if he failed to answer the summons, he would regret it forever, that somehow he would not achieve his destiny. He raced on toward the training grounds. Outside the doorway, he heard the gigantic, angry roar of Supremus, as if the abyssal was engaged in combat with some mighty foe. Dragons flashed by overhead. Spells erupted. Demons moved toward the Sanctuary of Shadows, as if they were preparing to block the path of powerful intruders. All was confusion.
* * *
MAIEV EMERGED FROM THE sewers into the aftermath of a terrible battle. She stood in a huge courtyard. The corpse of a nether drake lay on the ground near her, its tail still twitching as if the great reptile had not yet realized it was dead. Akama and his allies had carved their way through Illidan's defenses. Hundreds more corpses of Dragonmaw orcs and demons lay strewn across the ground. Potent magic had been unleashed here. Off to her right stood gigantic siege engines. Beyond them was a stairway fit for a titan. It led into the depths of the Black Temple. Still she sensed the pulse of that great portal being opened. She glared around her, and her eyes caught sight of something startlingly strange. A demonic figure erupted from an archway in the wall on her left.
* * *
VANDEL RACED FROM THE stairwell into the training courtyard. The air stank of death and unleashed magic. Dead dragons and demons lay everywhere. The corpses of fel orcs lay piled in small hills. What had once seemed an invincible force had been defeated. Only one living thing moved in the
aftermath of the awesome violence, a silver-armored night elf with a curved blade. Her entire body was shrouded by powerful magical armor. It was Maiev Shadowsong. Somehow she had managed to get into the temple as swiftly as he had gotten down from the walls. There was magic at work here. Maiev stared at him and raised her blade as if ready to attack. Vandel froze. He did not wish to fight a fellow night elf. He wanted only to get past her and answer Illidan's summons. "Demon spawn, prepare to die," Maiev said. Suddenly she was no longer where she had been. Vandel sensed a disturbance behind him and threw himself forward, rolling as a blade cleft the air where his head had been. He tumbled to his feet, facing Maiev. "I do not want to fight you," he said.
* * *
MAIEV CURSED. IT HAD been a long time since anyone had avoided one of her death strikes. It should not have been possible yet this foul monstrosity had done so. A mark of how potent he was. Maiev studied the thing. He looked in some ways like Illidan, although less monstrous. He was tall, a whipcord-thin abomination that had once been a kaldorei. He had tattoos like his master. His skin was scaly. His eye sockets were empty except for the molten green light of fel magic. He lacked wings and hooves, but there was something undeniably demonic about him. He had once been an elf, but now he was something else, a dreadful hybrid of elf and demon, doubtless one of the army of horrors that Akama had spoken of. Maiev aimed her blade at the monster. The demonically possessed elf leapt above the weapon. As she turned to strike at him again, he jumped to one side and once more eluded her. "Stop. There is no need for this," he said. She heard the grating anger in his voice, though, and was not about to fall for his trickery. She advanced upon him, her blade held at the ready. "I will have your life, monster."
* * *
THE TERRIBLE WEAPON SWEPT toward Vandel once more. He sprang over it, flipped himself clean over Maiev, and landed behind her. He had a clear shot with a spell at her back. He hesitated for a moment as she turned to face him. "I am not your enemy," he said. Her umbra crescent licked out again. Sparks flickered as he parried it. "We are on the same side, you and I." Maiev paused. Her cold laughter rang through the war-ravaged courtyard. "You serve Illidan. I mean to kill him. Of course we are not on the same side." "I am here to fight the Burning Legion, not other night elves." The point of the umbra crescent began to move from side to side, hypnotically. Vandel took a step back to give himself more room. "You have fallen for Illidan's old lie," Maiev said. "It is not a lie. I have slaughtered demons by the hundred. I will slay more for as long as there is breath in me." "That will not be for much longer." Maiev lunged, quick as a nightsaber. Vandel sprang clear and her blade passed through the spot where he had just stood. He fought down the urge to riposte. His demon urged him to attack. With an effort of will, he restrained himself. "The Burning Legion seeks to destroy all who live. We need to stand united against it," he said. "You will be united with your demon master in death." Maiev's strike was like a thunderbolt. Vandel hurled himself backward but it caught his cheek, slicing it open. Blood ran down over his lips. It tingled on his tongue. Vandel had had enough. He had tried reasoning with Maiev. He could try running but he doubted he would get far with his back to her. She was too strong and too fast. He needed to face her. You need to kill her, said the demonic voice in the back of his mind. It is you or her. She will not let you live. Vandel would have liked to deny it, but he knew the demon was speaking the truth, and that lent its argument force. He summoned fel energy and sent a bolt racing toward the night elf. She parried, dissipating it effortlessly. Vandel doubted anyone save Illidan or his highest lieutenants could have managed that feat. He realized that the objective here was not going to be killing Maiev. It was going to be staying alive in the face of her fury.
* * *
MAIEV'S EYES NARROWED. SO the demon's true colors were revealed now. He had attempted to strike her down with his fel magic. For a moment she had almost believed the monster's protestations. He had sounded sincere and had made no attempt to harm her, only to defend himself. In the distance the summoning reached a crescendo. Her prey was going to escape. It was time to end this. She launched a ferocious physical attack on the altered elf. Her blade flashed almost too fast for the eyes to follow. Her assailant raised his blades to parry.
* * *
VANDEL DANCED THROUGH A razor-edged whirlwind. It was all he could do to keep out of the way of Maiev's strikes. There was no chance of launching an attack of his own. She was simply too fast and too strong. Already his muscles ached from parrying the fury of her assault. It felt as if his arms were going to be torn from their sockets simply from the effort of blocking her attacks. He could barely maintain the grip on his blades. He backpedaled away from her as fast as he could. He was not worried about tripping over anything. His spectral senses allowed him to perceive everything around him. They also told him that he was running out of time. The demon within him howled its protests. It did not want to escape. It wanted to fight and kill. He allowed its power to flow into him. From the pores of his skin, darkness flowed, armoring his body with shadow. His arms grew stronger. His movements grew faster. He matched Maiev blow for blow, turning her blade with one of his, lashing out with the other. Metal shrieked as his weapon clawed its way along the vambrace of her armor. He struck again and again, driving the warden back first one step and then another until he had regained all the ground he had lost to her initial attack. Maiev slashed at him and he leapt above her blade, bringing his dagger down on her helmet and knocking her off balance. As she fell, he aimed a bolt of fel energy at her. It ravened into her chest. The demon urged him on. Kill her. Kill her.
* * *
MAIEV TUMBLED TO THE ground. The impact of the Illidari's blow had surprised her more than hurt her, but the burst of fel energy was painful even through her armor. The shadow-encased demon loomed above her, an aura of power playing around his hands. Maiev drew on the light of Elune and used her power to blink, vanishing from where she lay.
* * *
VANDEL WATCHED THE BOLT of yellow-green energy crash down into the ground where Maiev had been but an instant before. He felt the displacement of air behind him and turned a moment too late to block her strike. Her blade scythed in from the right and cut his arm. Pain blazed through it. Blood flowed. He hurled himself back and realized then that the attack had been a feint. Her blade crunched into his skull. He rolled away even as it made contact, but agony lanced through him. Darkness encroached on his field of vision. The last thing he saw was Khariel. A disappointed look was on his little boy's face. He was never going to be avenged now. "Thus will your master fall, too," he heard Maiev say. Then the darkness took him.
* * *
AKAMA ENTERED THE REFECTORY. Racks made from the bones of monsters flanked the doorway. A massive altar stood upon a plinth at the rear of the room. The flickering light of eldritch energies sent shadows skittering across the floor of the desecrated space. His allies had already slaughtered most of the opposition within and now confronted the shade that Illidan had drawn from Akama's own spirit. It looked like the Broken's shadow, if his shadow had been granted form in three dimensions and evil life. It was perfect in its way, a miracle of dark magic, a testament to the evil genius of Illidan, its creator. The massive form of the stolen part of his soul loomed over the adventurers from Azeroth. Sensing Akama's presence, it moved toward him, tendrils of dark energy lashing out from it, smashing into him. His allies
attacked it head-on, hammering at it with spells, charging in with their swords. He wrestled with the pain, kept himself on his feet. He gritted his teeth, even though he wanted to scream. He studied the weave of the magic attacking him. It led all the way back to the shade. The adventurers from Azeroth had done everything Akama had asked. They had opened the way into the refectory. They had slain the renegade Ashtongue forces guarding the place and then, one by one, had killed the channelers casting the spell that held the shard of his dark soul. Now the thing was free and it was coming for him. It intended to kill him if it could, to take possession of his body and, through him, all of the Ashtongue. He gazed at it with something like wonder. How many in their lives got to look upon everything that was evil in themselves? How many confronted all the darkness within? To anyone else, it looked merely like his evil shadow. He saw that it was made up of every bit of wickedness that had ever been in him. Every mean and petty deed, from the smallest to the largest. Looking at it, he could see when he was a child coveting his brother's toys. He saw himself gloating over the untimely death of a rival for the leadership of his people. He saw the shadow that lurked behind his every outward show of piety and goodness. He saw the vanity and the egoism and the lust and the greed for glory. He saw all his demons, all that had driven him to become what he was. Illidan had freed him of that, in a way. He had taken part of his strength, too, for in that darkness had been many of the things that had driven him to master magic, forged him to become leader of his people. He had always thought of himself as humble, but looking on this monster, he saw that humility had been a mask he wore, all the better to fool those who had followed him. He wanted to tell himself that these visions were part of the shade's attack on him, that it was attempting to undermine his will, to drive him to his knees, to force the rest of his soul from his body so that it could take residence. He knew that such was not the case. This shadow was part of him. He needed to reclaim it, for it held a great part of his strength, and only when he had reintegrated it would he have the power to do what was needed. The shade was weakening under the onslaught of its attackers, Akama's allies from Azeroth. Akama understood the spell now and unraveled it. He drew its energies
into himself. The vortex he created brought the spirit home. It fell into him. For a moment, he shuddered in dark ecstasy; then he put the chains in place around his own evil, binding it to him, integrating it into his being. He felt strength return. He felt power and pride and ambition flow into him. He was once more truly Akama. It was done. He took a deep breath and allowed the strength to surge back into his body. A crowd of Ashtongue entered the refectory and gazed up at him. "Hail Akama!" they shouted.
* * *
THE STEADY PULSE OF the portal-opening spell vanished. Maiev sprang over her fallen foe. She had no more time to waste. Even now she might be too late. She needed to find Illidan before he fled forever. She rushed past the smoldering stone form of some gigantic dead infernal. She raced into the enormous structure. Dead satyrs and other demons sprawled all around a massive hall. Ashtongue moved in groups. They stared at her. There was no menace in their gazes, but no warmth, either. They clearly knew who she was. She wondered whether they would dare attack her. There was only one way to find out. She marched over to the nearest of them. "Where is Akama?" she demanded in her most commanding tone. The Ashtongue looked at her. There was something different in his manner. In the past, the Broken had usually been obsequious. Even the ones guarding her would never meet her gaze. This one did, as did all his companions. They did not look at her as if they were afraid. They looked at her as if they were her equals. "He is deeper within the temple. He seeks to put an end to the Betrayer." "Good," she said. "I shall go and help him."
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE The Fall
WEARILY ILLIDAN EMERGED INTO HIS COUNCIL chamber. The demon hunters were away. He had done all he could. He wished he could have gone with them, but he had needed to remain behind as one mystical pole of the portal, to hold the way open. Now it was only a matter of waiting. Holding open that portal had taken almost all his strength and all the power within the soul siphon. Lady Malande looked at him. "The Ashtongue have betrayed us. Our servants have turned against us. The gates are open." "They must have planned this all along," said Gathios the Shatterer. Illidan reached out with his sorcerous senses. The binding spell he had maintained on Akama's shade was gone. Akama had freed himself and, in doing so, had freed his people. The old Broken had been more cunning than he thought. One more miscalculation. Illidan had been too busy with the portal to Argus and his demon hunters to pay attention to Akama. Still, he would find a way to make the leader of the Broken pay. "I sensed a portal opening," said High Nethermancer Zerevor. "I thought you had escaped, oh lord." His expression held a complex mix of emotions: gladness that his overlord was still there, puzzlement as to why. If he wanted an explanation, he was doomed to disappointment. Illidan sensed events closing in all around him. Things were unwinding. He was trapped by fate, his plans half complete. He thought of the vision the naaru had shown him. He doubted now that the creature was of the Light. Perhaps it had been part of the trap Kil'jaeden set for him. It had lulled him into a false sense of security at a critical time. Everything he had worked for so long to achieve had come undone.
Perhaps his demon hunters would fail. Perhaps he had only sent them to their doom. He resigned himself to the fact that he would never know. All he could do now was stand his ground. He would not give his enemies the satisfaction of his surrender. He would never be imprisoned again. He regarded his councilors. They still looked to him for leadership. "Defend this place," he said. "Guard the way into the summit of the temple. There is a spell I will cast. It may turn the battle our way. We will yet overthrow our enemies. We are not defeated yet."
* * *
AKAMA STEPPED OVER THE corpse of High Nethermancer Zerevor. Ahead of him loomed the sealed gateway to the summit of the temple. It had been a swift, hard-fought battle to get to this point. They had left a trail of broken bodies and shattered sentinels through the perfumed gardens and palatial apartments the blood elves occupied. Now ahead of him lay the great black door beyond which Illidan worked his evil magic. What new fiendish spell was he casting? The adventurers from Azeroth waited to see what he would do. Akama said, "This door is all that stands between us and the Betrayer. Stand aside, friends." He studied the spell sealing the way to the summit. It was a thing of fantastic intricacy, composed over multiple interlocking weaves of force. It would take a sorcerer a lifetime to unravel it. Fortunately, he did not need to do so. He merely needed to shatter it. He drew upon all his strength and launched it at the doorway. Somehow that fragile-looking structure resisted. He increased the amount of power, his spell rending and clawing at the seal with all the energies he commanded. It was still not enough. His shoulders slumped. He had come so far, risked so much. "I cannot do this alone ..." Frustration forced the words from Akama's lips. He sensed the presence of others of his people. Powerful spirits, familiar and mighty ghosts, unleashed to stalk through the Temple of Karabor by the events of the day.
"You are not alone, Akama," said one of the spirits. It wore the form of his onetime companion, the seer Udalo. "Your people will always be with you!" The other spirit had taken the shape of Seer Olum. Akama was struck with awe. I had not thought to see you so soon, old friend. The seer had been one of Akama's closest allies, until Vashj's naga discovered that Olum was plotting to depose the Betrayer. Olum had asked Akama to slay him in order to keep up the appearance that the Ashtongue were loyal to Illidan. Akama had sadly complied. The spirits added their strength to his own. Slowly at first, the binding spell began to come apart, shredded by the torrent of power thrown at it, power backed by the will of an entire people freed from chains. The spell collapsed. The ghosts began to fade. Akama said, "I thank you for your aid, brothers. Our people will be redeemed!" Had Akama the time to reflect, he would have wept with joy. Olum's sacrifice had allowed him to get to this door, and his spirit had returned to help him open it. It was a good omen. But triumph warred with dread within Akama's soul. Soon he and his allies would have to face the Betrayer. Even after all this time, all his scheming, and all his planning, Akama was not certain that he was prepared for that.
* * *
ILLIDAN FELT THE SEAL give way on the gateway to the Black Temple's summit. Akama had grown powerful indeed to tear it down so quickly. He had learned a great deal during his time within Illidan's service, including how to work counterspells against his master's magic. Illidan remained crouched down, wings wrapped around his body, taking these last few moments to draw what power he could to himself before the final conflict of his life was upon him.
* * *
FILLED WITH TREPIDATION, Akama entered the summit. Even now victory was far from certain. The Betrayer might find some way of turning things around
even as Akama's people threw the gates of the temple open to welcome the Aldor and the Scryers and their allies. Illidan crouched down on the far side of the summit. In the center was a great grill, shielding a central well that went all the way down into the heart of the Temple of Karabor. The Betrayer held a skull in his hands as if contemplating a reminder of his own mortality. He was utterly still, immobile as one dead. Surely he could not have taken his own life. Akama studied the aura swirling around his former master. No. He yet lived. Titanic swells of energy rose within him. He was merely gathering his strength. All around, Akama's allies checked their weapons nervously. Illidan seemed to be waiting for all his enemies to enter. It was as if he wanted them all in one place and had no fear of their superior numbers. Given the powers on which he could call, Akama thought his lack of concern might be justified. Where are his mutated soldiers? Akama wondered. All through the battle in the temple, Akama had looked for the demon hunters to appear, but there was no sign of their presence. Nor was there any sign of the great portal Akama had sensed being opened. He had expected Illidan to flee through it. In truth he would have half welcomed it, because it would have averted this final, likely fatal confrontation. It spoke volumes of the Betrayer's confidence that he gave the intruders time to prepare themselves. Akama pushed the thoughts aside and began to draw on his own powers.
* * *
ILLIDAN STUDIED THE FORCES arrayed against him. It felt strange to see so many enemies within the heart of the Black Temple. It was even stranger in its way to see Akama standing beside them. He still could not believe the old Broken had the nerve to do such a thing. He had eluded all the traps and escaped all the shackles Illidan had prepared for him. And now he was here, surrounded by these outsiders he had brought to fight for him. Anger filled Illidan's heart. He stared hard at Akama, letting his contempt show on his face. "Akama. Your duplicity is hardly surprising. I should have slaughtered you and your malformed brethren long ago."
Akama recoiled from the venom in Illidan's voice. He took a moment to gather himself and said, "We have come to end your reign, Illidan. My people and all of Outland shall be free!" "Boldly said. But I remain ... unconvinced." "The time has come! The moment is at hand!" Illidan glared at the Broken and his pathetic allies. "You are not prepared." A massive warrior emerged from the pack, garbed in heavy plate, protective spells woven around him. Illidan saw the network of defensive magic that connected him to the Azerothian casters. Illidan leapt forward and struck a powerful blow with his warglaive. The warrior raised a shield to block it. Illidan took advantage of the opening to slash at his neck with the left-hand blade. Blood spurted from the warrior's throat, but healing magic surged in, drawing the blood back and knitting torn flesh and severed veins. Illidan summoned a parasitic shadowfiend to him. The creature slithered out of the Twisting Nether and into reality, racing toward the spellcaster who had done the healing. Unless the shadowfiend was stopped, it would soon spawn more. A hail of spells smashed into Illidan's defenses but did not overcome them. For mortals, these casters were potent, but he would show them they were no match for the lord of Outland. Illidan spread his arms wide and summoned fire. A great swath of it blazed all around him, scorching his attackers. One of them screamed and fell, his skin blackened, his eyeballs popping from the heat. Illidan laughed. The sorcerers among his host of enemies frantically redirected their spells to protect themselves. Illidan sensed a presence behind him, a shadow figure bearing two blades. The poison coating the swords made his nostrils twitch. He turned just as his assailant was about to drive the weapons into his back. With one hand he caught him by the throat. With a word of power, he ignited his foe's flesh with persistent fire and cast him aside to burn down to blackened bones. An arrow flashed toward Illidan's head. He turned so it glanced off his horn. A gigantic hunting beast bounded right at him. He summoned a wall of shadows that began to drain away the life of the beast and all the attackers close by. Their energy flooded into him, fueling his spells. He blocked another thrust, chopped down his attacker.
Wild joy flowed through his veins. He exulted in every death he caused, feeding on it. Every fallen foe filled him with glee and an urge to scream his triumph to the skies. They had come to slay him, had they? Well, they would find out he did not die so easily.
* * *
IN BATTLE THE BETRAYER was awesome. Akama had to admit it. The Broken's allies were among the greatest fighters of Azeroth, and he was aiding them as best he could, but one by one they were going down. Attacking Illidan now was like attacking a wounded rabid wolf. It was clear that he intended to drag as many down into death with him as he could. Worse, his unrelenting savagery might yet lead to his victory. If he triumphed here, he might leave this place and rally the defenders of the Black Temple. Then things would look black indeed for Akama's people. Where is Maiev? Akama wondered. Her presence at this juncture could turn the whole course of the battle. "Come, my minions!" Illidan bellowed. "Deal with this traitor as he deserves!" Akama sensed the approach of reinforcements loyal to the Betrayer. If they should arrive and flank Illidan's attackers ... Akama shouted, "I will deal with these mongrels! Strike now, friends! Strike at the Betrayer!" He turned away from the fight to confront the onrushing sentries. His allies were on their own.
* * *
THE MASSIVE FORM OF the sentinel golem loomed over Maiev, reaching out for her with its enormous metal hands. Maiev dispatched the blood elven construct with a blow and glanced around. All through the vast area of the pleasure gardens, she had found signs of conflict. Dead concubines sprawled on the flowering swards, poisoned blades clutched in their hands. The severed limbs and heads of sin'dorei sorcerers lay beside them. Akama and his allies had left a trail of destruction that was easy to follow.
She raced up the stairs. Somewhere above her she sensed titanic energies being unleashed. She recognized them as being wielded by the Betrayer. It looked as if the final battle had started without her. She raced on toward the conflict, praying to Elune that she would not be too late to mete judgment.
* * *
THE PALADIN BROUGHT HER gleaming hammer crashing down. It hit the ground in front of Illidan, splintering the stonework. He leapt into the air, wings beating powerfully, and surveyed his attackers. He spread his arms wide and called once more upon the power of flames. A huge fireball blasted down in the midst of his enemies. A warrior raced from the firestorm, burning cloak blazing behind him like the tail of a comet. Illidan focused his gaze on the ground before him, summoning blue demon fire. A druid rushed into it. It clung to her form, burning her even as she rolled on the floor in an attempt to extinguish the flames. Lightning bolts smashed up at Illidan from the ground. The air turned cold as one particularly bold wizard attempted to draw on the strength of ice to neutralize his power. Illidan sent a barrage of shadowy bolts raining down on him. The mage howled as they ravaged his flesh. Now it was time to show these fools the true meaning of power. He tossed his warglaives to the ground and then called upon the power within them. "I will not be touched by rabble such as you! Behold the flames of Azzinoth." Twin flame elementals leapt forth in answer to his call. A line of fire linked them. They swarmed toward his attackers, who moved into a defensive circle. The Betrayer took advantage of this distraction to rest. Beneath him the invaders lashed at his summonings with enchanted weapons and a barrage of spells. Another pair fell before they could overcome the burning elementals. Illidan marshaled the last of his strength, determined to slay as many of his foes as he could before death had a chance to claim him. He plunged down amid his attackers, drawing once more upon his fel power. It encased his form, transforming him into something gigantic, demonic, unstoppable. He lashed out with bursts of flame, incinerating his foes, burning flesh and blood and spirit.
A warlock cloaked with spells of protection charged at him, staff raised high. Illidan struck at her, but the wards surrounding the warlock neutralized some of the power of his blow. More and more spells hammered at him. He felt corruption seeded within his flesh. It started to rot. He imbued the shadows surrounding his body with a fragment of his will and then separated them off to bedevil his attackers. He did this again and again as his opponents attacked. He sent waves of hellish fire sweeping over them. It was getting harder to kill his foes, either because he was weaker than at the start of the fight or because all the easiest enemies to slay were down. The constant hammering of the magical bolts was draining his strength. The enemy attacks reached a crescendo as his foes desperately tried to bring him down. Then came a moment of calm. He had ridden out the storm. He stood upright, glared at his opponents, and said, "Is this it, mortals? Is this all the fury you can muster?" A cold, familiar voice echoed across the summit. "Their fury pales before mine, Illidan. We have some unsettled business between us." Illidan turned his head. An all-too-familiar armored figure stood there, weapon at the ready. At first he wondered if it was an illusion, a specter summoned from the depths of his imagination by some spell. His spectral sight told him otherwise. The figure had weight and mass and presence. He knew that armor well. He knew that blade. He recognized the arrogant superiority of the voice and stance. No doubt about it. Warden Maiev was here. Rage boiled within him. He struggled to speak. All this time, he had her within his grasp and had not killed her. Now she was here. Memories of his long imprisonment flooded back. "Maiev ..." How was it even possible? But he already knew the answer. Akama. He had been responsible for her imprisonment. Akama's cohorts drew themselves up in a new battle line. They seemed to have gained strength and confidence from Maiev's presence and his discomfiture. Illidan could almost see the cruel smile curving Maiev's lips beneath her helmet. "Ah, my long hunt is finally over," she said. "Today, justice will be done."
* * *
MAIEV LAUNCHED HERSELF FORWARD, blade swirling in her hand. Illidan tried to stop her. Evil shadows clawed at her. Waves of fire swept over her. Yet her armor protected her as she closed the distance. She lashed out at the Betrayer. He parried. They stood for a moment, breast-to-breast, close as lovers. She sensed the blazing fury in him, the pent-up hatred and energy. She unleashed the spell she had brooded on during her months of imprisonment. The enchantment glittered on the ground before her and she stepped back from it. The Betrayer pounced, activating the spell. Bonds of energy lashed out from the trap, draining power from him. His face twisted as he realized what was happening. Akama's allies rushed into the fray, weapons bared, spells glittering in the air. Weapons thundered home. Illidan slashed at them, twisting to avoid their blows, countering their spells, but he had lost some of his fury. He stumbled forward into another trap Maiev had unleashed. The Azerothians pursued him as he reeled under the impact of the magic. Maiev had eyes only for her ancient enemy. She knew, as surely as he did, that this would be their final meeting. One of them was not going to walk away from this. She thought of Anyndra, Sarius, and all the others who had died along the road to this moment. She thought about her own imprisonment. It had sharpened her hunger for justice. Her entire life had been leading up to this. Maiev's and Illidan's weapons flickered too fast for the eye to follow. Blade parried blade. Ward countered destructive spell. Whatever Illidan threw at her, she neutralized. Victory rode on her every stroke. She was going to win. She could tell from his expression that Illidan understood this, too. More spells smashed into him. She wanted to tell the others to stop. She wished to defeat him one-on-one, to enjoy a solitary triumph, but it was too late for that. She would have to settle for seeing justice executed. The ending came suddenly. A flicker of steel and spells blurred the air and her blade bit home, passing through ribs, biting into flesh, seeking the heart that still beat in Illidan's demonically mutated chest. For a moment, he attempted to strike back. His lips twisted into an arrogant sneer. He looked as if he was about to utter another spell, but then
the realization of what happened hit him, along with the pain, and he crumpled to his knees.
* * *
ILLIDAN LOOKED UP IN disbelief. His gaze met Maiev's. Her eyes glared down coldly at him. Her stare belonged to a predator that had finally dragged down its prey. There was satisfaction there, and madness, and something else. She had killed him, but she did not realize what she had done. "It is finished," she said. "You are beaten." Feeling the pain exploding in his chest, he knew the truth of her words. His time had finally run out. All those long years of study, of fighting, of imprisonment were done. He looked at her and felt a fleeting moment of sympathy for her. She did not understand that it was over for her, too. He forced the words from his lips. "You have won ... Maiev. But the huntress ... is nothing without the hunt. You ... are nothing ... without me." Blackness swept over him. Just for a moment he had a vision of a sigil, the same one the naaru had placed on his forehead. It blazed in lines of golden light for an instant, and then the universe went dark.
* * *
MAIEV STOOD OVER THE corpse of Illidan. Her eyes narrowed as she studied her prey to make sure he was dead. She was not certain what exactly she was waiting for. The exultation of triumph. The pleasure of a victory long delayed. Nothing came. His corpse looked merely shabby in death. All the power, all the magnificence, had drained out of it. Here lay just another monster who had proved fodder to her blade. Looking at Illidan's body, she thought, This is what I spent all the long millennia of my life trying to achieve? It did not seem to be enough for the expenditure of all those years and all those lives. She thought about his words. Had there been a spell woven into them, a last curse from the fallen lord of Outland? She inspected the weave of defensive spells around her and found them intact. If Illidan had cursed her, it was with greater subtlety than any mage in history.
No. There was no magic in his words. Only truth. She had dedicated so much of her life to hunting the Betrayer that now she felt lost. She was hollow. "He is right," she said softly. "I feel nothing. I am nothing." She looked at Akama's allies. Were they responsible for this? Had they robbed her of her triumph by their presence? In a moment of near madness, she considered attacking them, but she pushed the thought from her mind. "Farewell, champions," she said. She barely glanced at the returning Akama as she swept from the summit.
* * *
AKAMA WATCHED MAIEV LEAVE. The Broken had driven off the Betrayer's reinforcements to give his allies time to slay Illidan, and slay him they had, with the help of the mighty night elf. He would have liked to thank her, but he was relieved she was gone. There was no telling what one so violent, impulsive, and powerful would do under these circumstances. She had reason to hate him. He was glad she had not tried to take vengeance on him as well. Akama looked down on the body of his former master. It looked smaller now, and when he bent to lift it, it felt lighter than that of a child, as if all weight had left it with the spirit of its owner. There was still a mystery here. Where were the demon hunters? Why had they not entered the fray? He had sensed the portal Illidan had opened. If they had gone through it, where did it lead? Had they really gone to Argus? He pushed the thoughts aside. These were problems for another day. Now he must deal with the consequences of victory. The summit looked as if demons had made war in it. Stone had melted and flowed like lava. Patches of shadow clung where no shadow should have been. This place would need to be purified, he thought. Shrines would need to be built, services for the fallen to be held. There was a lot of work to be done here. But his people could do it. They were whole once more, and together there was nothing they could not achieve. "The Light will fill these dismal halls once again," he said. "I swear it." Then he turned and limped away from where the lord of Outland had fallen.
* * *
VANDEL WOKE, IF IT could be called waking. His arm was scarred where Maiev's blade had bit into it. His wounds had knit together, but he felt weak. His skull ached from a huge gash. Glancing around, he saw that the training grounds were full of Aldor and Scryer fighters. They chanted victory songs, swigged from one another's canteens, slapped one another on the back. All the rivalries between the two factions seemed to be forgotten. Among the soldiers were the Ashtongue. There was a new confidence about the Broken. They moved with purpose, not listlessness. They eyed their surroundings with the air of owners who had newly come into their heritage. Vandel tested his limbs. They still worked. He crawled into a patch of shadow and willed himself invisible. "The Betrayer is dead!" shouted a blood elf triumphantly. The announcement was greeted with cheers. He could hear them echo around the vast courtyard where once the Dragonmaw had gathered their mighty steeds and demons sworn to the service of Illidan had walked. Could it be true? Looking at the aftermath of the carnage, Vandel could not see how it could not be. He thought about the threat of the Burning Legion. What would happen now that the only leader who had ever understood its true magnitude was gone? Where were Vandel's fellows? He reached out with his senses, stretching them to the limits as he tried to find another demon hunter. They were all vanished, as if they had never been. Could they all be dead? Was he the last? Was Illidan's great war finished before it had even begun? Black despair swept over him. In the midst of the songs of triumph, he felt like weeping. These would-be heroes had no understanding of the damage they had done. All was lost. There was nothing more to do here. He could throw himself into their midst, striking right and left until he was cut down for certain this time. He looked at the amulet he had made for Khariel so long ago. There would be no vengeance. He rose to attack, drew on the fel energies that would let him slay and slay. Then he heard it, Illidan's familiar voice, a whisper so faint that it might have come from the far edge of the universe or the other side of death, or
from the deepest recesses of his memory. You must be prepared. He paused for a moment, restraining the urge to violence. The voice sounded too real to be a mere memory. It was as if the Betrayer was speaking to him as when he had summoned him for the final time. Was it possible that some remnant of his spirit survived? There would be time to think about such things later. Now there was still work to be done. Demons to be slain. Revenge to be taken. Perhaps he could pass on the message, train others, try to be ready for the final days, when the Burning Legion reappeared seeking ultimate victory. He drew upon his demon's energies, stepped deeper into shadow, and vanished into the night

Kezzig Klackwhistle straightened from where he'd been kneeling for what felt like at least a decade, placing his big green hands on the small of his back and grimacing at the ensuing cascade of pops. He licked his dry lips and looked around, squinting against the blinding sunlight and mopping his bald head with a sweat-stiff kerchief. Here and there were tightly clustered swirling swarms of insects. And of course the sand, everywhere, and most of it probably going to end up inside his underclothes. Just as it had yesterday. And the day before. Man, Silithus was an ugly place. Its appearance had not been improved in the slightest by the gargantuan sword an angry titan had shoved into it. The thing was massive. Ginormous. Colossal. All the grand and fancy and multisyllabic words goblins smarter than he could possibly throw at it. It had been plunged deep into the heart of the world, right here in scenic Silithus. The bright side, of course, was that the enormous artifact provided a great deal of what he and the other hundred or so goblins were searching for right this very moment. "Jixil?" he said to his companion, who was analyzing a hovering
rock with the Spect-o-Matic 4000. "Yeah?" The other goblin peered at the reading, shook his head, and tried again. "I hate this place." "Ya do? Huh. It speaks well of you." Glaring at the piece of equipment, the smaller, squatter goblin smacked it soundly. "Ha ha, very funny," Kezzig grumbled. "No, I mean it." Jixil sighed, trudged to another rock, and began to scan it. "We all hate this place, Kezzig." "No, I really mean it. I'm not cut out for this environment. I used to work in Winterspring. I'm a snow-loving, snuggle-by-the-fire, hollyjolly kinda goblin." Jixil threw him a withering glance. "So what happened to bring you here instead of staying there, where you weren't annoying me?" Kezzig grimaced, rubbing the back of his neck. "Little Miss Lunnix Sprocketslip happened. See, I was working in her mining supply shop. I'd go out as a guide for the occasional visitor to our cozy little hamlet of Everlook. Lunny and I kinda...yeah." He smiled nostalgically for a moment, then scowled. "Then she goes and gets her nose out of joint when she caught me hanging around Gogo." "Gogo," Jixil repeated in a flat voice. "Gee. I wonder why Lunnix would get upset with you hanging around a girl named Gogo." "I know! Gimme a break. It gets cold up there. A guy has to snuggle by the fire now and then or he'll freeze, am I right? Anyway, that place suddenly got hotter than here at midday." "We got nothing here," Jixil said. He'd obviously stopped paying attention to Kezzig's description of his Winterspring plight. Sighing, Kezzig picked up the huge pack of equipment, slung it easily over his shoulders, and lugged it over to where Jixil still was hoping for positive results. Kezzig let the bundle drop to the earth, and there came the sound of delicate pieces of equipment clanking perilously against one another. "I hate sand," he continued. "I hate the sun. And oh boy, do I really, really hate bugs. I hate the little bugs, because they like to crawl into
your ears and up your nose. I hate the big bugs because, well, they're big bugs. I mean, who doesn't hate that? It's kind of a universal hate. But my particular hate burns with the light of a thousand suns." "I thought you hated suns." "I do, but I-" Jixil suddenly stiffened. His magenta eyes widened as he stared at his Spect-o-Matic. "What I meant was-" "Shut up, you idiot!" Jixil snapped. Now Kezzig was staring at the instrument, too. It was going insane. Its little needle flipped back and forth. The small light at the top flashed an urgent, excited red. The two goblins looked at each other. "Do you know what this means?" Jixil said in a voice that trembled. Kezzig's lips curved in a grin that revealed almost all of his jagged yellow teeth. He curled one hand into a fist and smacked it firmly into the palm of the other. "It means," he said, "we get to eliminate the competition."
Rain fell on the somber throngs making their way to Lion's Rest as if even the sky wept for those who had sacrificed their lives to defeat the Burning Legion. Anduin Wrynn, king of Stormwind, stood a few steps back from the podium where he soon would be addressing mourners of all the Alliance races. He watched them silently as they arrived, moved to see them, loath to speak to them. He suspected that this service honoring the fallen would be the most difficult he had endured in his relatively short life not just for the other mourners but for himself; it would be held in the shadow of his father's empty tomb. Anduin had attended far, far too many ceremonies honoring the casualties of war. As he did each time-as, he believed, every good leader did-he hoped and prayed that this one would be the last. But it never was. Somehow there was always another enemy. Sometimes the enemy was new, a group springing up seemingly out of nowhere. Or something ancient and long-chained or buried, supposedly neutralized, rising after eons of silence to terrorize and destroy innocents. Other times the enemy was bleakly familiar but no less a
threat for the intimacy of the knowledge. How had his father met those challenges time after time? Anduin wondered. How had his grandfather? Now was a time of relative quiet, but the next enemy, the next challenge, doubtless would arrive all too soon. It had not been all that long since Varian Wrynn's death, but for the great man's son it felt like a lifetime. Varian had fallen in the first real push of this latest war against the Legion, apparently slain as much by betrayal from a supposed ally, Sylvanas Windrunner, as by the monstrous, fel-fueled creatures vomited forth from the Twisting Nether. Another account, from someone Anduin trusted, contested that version, suggesting that Sylvanas had had no other choice. Anduin was not sure what to believe. Thoughts of the cunning and treacherous leader of the Horde made Anduin angry, as they always did. And, as always, he called on the Holy Light for calmness. It did not serve to harbor hatred in his heart even for such a deserving enemy. And it would not bring back his father. Anduin took comfort in knowing that the legendary warrior had died fighting and that his sacrifice had saved many lives. And in that fraction of a second, Prince Anduin Wrynn had become king. In many ways, Anduin had been preparing for this position all his life. Even so, he was keenly aware that in other, very important, ways, he hadn't truly been ready. Maybe still wasn't. His father had loomed so large not just in the eyes of his youthful son but in the eyes of Varian's people-even in the eyes of his enemies. Dubbed Lo'Gosh, or "ghost wolf," for his ferocity in battle, Varian had been more than a powerful warrior superbly skilled at combat. He had been an extraordinary leader. In the first few weeks after his father's shocking death, Anduin had done his best to comfort a grieving, stunned populace reeling from the loss, while denying himself a proper chance to mourn. They grieved for the Wolf. Anduin grieved for the man. And when he lay awake at night, unable to sleep, he would wonder
just how many demons in the end it had taken to murder King Varian Wrynn. Once he had voiced this thought to Genn Greymane, king of the fallen realm of Gilneas, who had stepped in to counsel the fledgling monarch. The old man had smiled even though sorrow haunted his eyes. "All I can tell you, my boy, is that before they got to your father, he had single-handedly killed the largest fel reaver I ever saw, in order to save an airship full of retreating soldiers. I know for certain that Varian Wrynn made the Legion pay dearly for taking him." Anduin did not doubt that. It wasn't enough, but it had to be. Although there were plenty of armed guards in attendance, Anduin had put on no armor on this day when the dead were remembered. He was dressed in a white silk shirt, lambskin gloves, dark blue breeches, and a heavy formal coat trimmed in gold. His only weapon was an instrument of peace as much as war: the mace Fearbreaker, which he wore at his side. When he had gifted the young prince with it, the former dwarf king Magni Bronzebeard had said that Fearbreaker was a weapon that had known the taste of blood in some hands and had stanched blood in others. Anduin wanted to meet and thank as many as he could among the bereaved today. He wished he could console everyone, but the cold truth was that such a thing was impossible. He took comfort in the certainty that the Light shone upon them all...even a tired young king. He lifted his face, knowing the sun was behind the clouds and letting the gentle drops fall like a benediction. He recalled that it also had rained a few years ago during a similar ceremony honoring those who had made the final, greatest sacrifice in the campaign to halt the mighty Lich King. Two whom Anduin loved had been in attendance then who were not here today. One, of course, was his father. The second was the woman he had fondly called Aunt Jaina: Lady Jaina Proudmoore. Once, the lady of Theramore and the prince of Stormwind had been in agreement regarding the desire for peace between the Alliance and the
Horde. And once there had been a Theramore. But Jaina's city had been destroyed by the Horde in the most horrific manner possible, and its bereft lady had never been able to ease the pain of that terrible moment fully. Anduin had watched her try repeatedly, only to have some fresh torment reinjure her wounded heart. Finally, unable to bear the thought of working alongside the Horde even against so dread a foe as the demonic Legion, Jaina had walked out on the Kirin Tor, which she led, on the blue dragon Kalecgos, whom she loved, and on Anduin, whom she had inspired his whole life. "May I?" The voice was warm and kind, as was the woman who asked the question. Anduin smiled down at High Priestess Laurena. She was asking if he wished her blessing. He nodded and inclined his head and felt the tightness in his chest ease and his soul settle. He then stood respectfully to the side while she spoke to the crowd, awaiting his own turn. He had not been able to speak formally at his father's memorial service. The grief had been too raw, too overwhelming. It had shifted shape in his heart over time, becoming less immediate but no less great, and so he had agreed to say a few words today. Anduin stepped beside his father's tomb. It was empty; what the Legion had done to Varian had ensured that his body could not be recovered. Anduin regarded the stone face on the tomb. It was a good likeness and a comfort to look upon. But even the skilled stonecrafters could not capture Varian's fire, his quick temper, his easy laugh, his motion. In a way, Anduin was glad the tomb was empty; he would always, in his heart, see his father as alive and vibrant. His mind went back to when he first had ventured to the place where his father had fallen. Where Shalamayne, gifted to Varian by the lady Jaina, had lain, dormant without Varian's touch. Awaiting the touch of another to which it would respond. The touch of the great warrior's son.
As he held it, he had almost felt Varian's presence. It was then, when Anduin truly accepted the duties of a king, that light had again begun to swirl in the sword-not the orange-red hue of the warrior but the warm, golden glow of the priest. At that moment, Anduin had begun to heal. Genn Greymane would be the last person to call himself eloquent, but Anduin would never forget the words the older man had said: Your father's actions were indeed heroic. They were his challenge to us, his people, to never let fear prevail...even at the very gates of hell. Genn wisely had not said they were never to fear. They were only not to let it win. I will not, Father. And Shalamayne knows that. Anduin forced himself to return to the present. He nodded to Laurena, then turned to look at the crowd. The rain was slowing but hadn't stopped, yet no one seemed inclined to leave. Anduin's gaze swept over the widows and widowers, the childless parents, the orphans, and the veterans. He was proud of the soldiers who had died on the battlefield. He hoped their spirits would rest easily, knowing their loved ones were heroes, too. Because there was no one assembled at Lion's Rest today who had let fear prevail. He spotted Greymane, hanging back beside a lamppost. Their eyes met, and the older man nodded a brief acknowledgment. Anduin allowed his gaze to roam over the faces, those he knew and those he did not. A little pandaren girl was struggling not to cry; he gave her a reassuring smile. She gulped and smiled back shakily. "Like many of you, I know firsthand the pain of loss," he said. His voice rang clear and strong, carrying to those who stood in the farthest rows. "You all know that my fath-" He paused, clearing his throat, and continued. "King Varian Wrynn...fell during the first major battle at the Broken Isles, when the Legion invaded Azeroth yet again. He died to save his soldiers-the brave men and women who faced unspeakable horrors to protect us, our lands, our world. He knew that no one-not even a king-is more
important than the Alliance. Each of you has lost your own king or queen. Your father or mother, brother or sister, son or daughter. "And because he and so many others had the courage to make that sacrifice, we did the impossible." Anduin looked from face to face, saw how hungry they were for comfort. "We defeated the Burning Legion. And now we honor those who sacrificed all. We honor them not by dying...but by living. By healing our wounds and helping others heal. By laughing and feeling the sun on our faces. By holding our loved ones close and letting them know every hour, every minute of every day, that they matter." The rain had stopped. The clouds began to clear, and bits of bright blue peeked through. "Neither we nor our world escaped unscathed," Anduin continued. "We are scarred. A defeated titan has pierced our beloved Azeroth with a terrible sword crafted from hatred made manifest, and we do not yet know what toll it will take. Places in our hearts will forever remain empty. But if you would serve one king who grieves with you today, if you would honor the memory of another king who died for you, then I urge you-live. For our lives, our joy, our world, these are the gifts of the fallen. And we must cherish them. For the Alliance!" The crowd cheered, some through their tears. Now it was others' turn to speak. Anduin stepped to the side, allowing them to come up and address the crowd. As he did so, his gaze flitted back to Greymane, and his heart sank. Mathias Shaw, master of spies and head of Stormwind's intelligence service, SI:7, stood beside the deposed king of Gilneas. And both men looked as grim as Anduin had ever seen them. He was not overly fond of Shaw, though the spymaster had served Varian and now Anduin loyally and well. The king was intelligent enough to understand and value the service SI:7 agents performed for their kingdom. Indeed, he would never know exactly how many agents had lost their lives in this recent war. Unlike warriors, those who operated in the shadows lived, served, and died with few ever knowing of their deeds. No, it wasn't the spymaster himself Anduin disliked. It was the need for men and women like him that he regretted.
Laurena had followed his gaze and stepped in without a word as Anduin nodded to Genn and Shaw, moving his head to indicate that they should speak away from the throngs of mourners who would not depart for some time. Some lingered, kneeling in prayer. Some would go home and continue to grieve in private. Others would go to taverns to remind themselves that they were still among the living and could yet enjoy food and drink and laughter. To celebrate life, as Anduin had urged them. But a king's tasks were never done. The three men walked quietly behind the memorial. The clouds were almost gone, and the rays of the setting sun sparkled on the water of the harbor that spread out below. Anduin went to the carved stone wall and placed his hands on it, breathing deeply of the sea air and listening to the cry of the gulls. Taking a moment to steady himself before hearing whatever dark words Shaw had to utter. As soon as word of the great sword in Silithus had reached him, Anduin had ordered Shaw to investigate and report. He needed boots on the ground there, not the wild rumors that had been circulating. It sounded impossible, and terrifying, and the worst part of it was that it was all true. The final act of a corrupted being, the very last and most devastating blow struck in the war against the Legion, had all but obliterated much of Silithus. The only thing that had mitigated the scope of the disaster had been that mercifully, in his random, angry blow, Sargeras had not thrust the sword into a more populated part of the world than the nearly empty desert land. Had he struck here, in the Eastern Kingdoms, a continent away from Silithus...Anduin could not permit himself to go down that path. He would be grateful for what little he could be. Shaw had hitherto sent missives with information. Anduin had not expected the man himself to return quite so soon. "Tell me," was all the king said. "Goblins, sir. A whole mess of the unsavory creatures. It seems they began arriving within a day of-"
He broke off. No one had come up with a vocabulary to describe the sword that felt comfortable. "Of the sword-strike," Mathias continued. "That fast?" Anduin was startled. He kept his expression neutral as he continued to gaze out over the water. The ships and their crews look so small from here, he thought. Like toys. So breakable. "That fast," Shaw confirmed. "Goblins aren't the most charming, but they are cunning. And they do things for a reason," Anduin said. "And those reasons usually involve money." Only one group could gather and finance so many goblins so quickly: the Bilgewater Cartel, which had the support of the Horde. This had the oily fingerprints of the unctuous and morally deficient Jastor Gallywix all over it. Anduin pressed his lips together for a moment before speaking. "So. The Horde has found something valuable in Silithus. What is it this time? Another ancient city to scavenge?" "No, Your Majesty. They found...this." The king turned around. In Shaw's palm was a dirty white handkerchief. Wordlessly, he unfolded it. In the center was a small pebble of some golden substance. It looked like honey and ice, warm and inviting, yet also cool and comforting. And...it was glowing. Anduin eyed it skeptically. It was appealing, yes, but no more so than other gems. It didn't look like anything to warrant a huge influx of goblins. Anduin was confused, and he glanced over at Genn, an eyebrow raised in query. He knew little of spycraft, and Shaw, though well regarded by all, was still largely an enigma that Anduin was only beginning to decipher. Genn nodded, acknowledging that Shaw's gesture was odd and the object odder but indicating that however Shaw wished to proceed, Anduin could trust him. The king removed his glove and held out his hand. The stone tumbled gently into Anduin's palm.
And he gasped. The heaviness of grief vanished as if it were physical armor that had been seized and yanked off. Weariness fled, replaced by surging, almost crackling energy and insight. Strategies raced through his head, each one of them sound and successful, each one of them engendering a shift in comprehension and ensuring a lasting peace that benefited every being on Azeroth. Not only his mind but also his body seemed to ascend abruptly and shockingly, rocketing in an instant to whole new levels of strength, dexterity, and control. Anduin felt like he could not only climb mountains...he could move them. He could end war, channel the Light into every dark corner. He was exultant and also perfectly, wholly calm and completely certain as to how to channel this rushing river-no, tsunami-of energy and power. Not even the Light affected him as this...this did. The sensation was similar but less spiritual, more physical. More alarming. For a long moment, Anduin couldn't speak, could only stare in wonder at the infinitely precious thing he cupped in his palm. At last he found his voice. "What...what is this?" he managed. "We don't know." Shaw's voice was blunt. What could be done with this! Anduin thought. How many could it heal? How many could it strengthen, soothe, invigorate, inspire? How many could it kill? The thought was a gut punch, and he felt the elation inspired by the gemstone retreat. When he spoke again, Anduin's voice was strong and determined. "It would seem the Horde does know...and we must find out more." This could not be allowed to fall into the wrong hands. Into Sylvanas's hands... So much power... He closed his fingers carefully around the small nugget of limitless
possibility and turned again to the west. "Agreed," Shaw replied. "We have eyes on it." They stood for a moment while Anduin considered his next words. He knew that both Shaw and Greymane-the latter uncharacteristically silent but looking on approvingly-were awaiting his orders, and he was grateful to have such staunch individuals in his service. A lesser man than Shaw would have pocketed this sample. "Get your best people on it, Shaw. Pull them off other assignments if need be. We must learn more about this. I'll be calling a meeting of my advisers shortly." Anduin extended his hand for Shaw's handkerchief and carefully rewrapped the small chunk of this unknown, unbelievable material. He tucked it into a pocket. The sensation was less intense, but he still could feel it. Anduin already had intended to travel, to visit the lands of Stormwind's allies. To thank them and help them recover from the ravages of war. His schedule had just been accelerated drastically.
Sylvanas Windrunner, former ranger-general of Silvermoon, the Dark Lady of the Forsaken, and present warchief of the mighty Horde, had resented being told to come to Orgrimmar like a dog that needed to perform all its tricks. She had wanted to return to the Undercity. She missed its shadows, its dampness, its restful quietude. Rest in peace, she thought grimly, and felt the tug of an amused smile. It faded almost at once as she continued pacing impatiently in the small chamber behind the warchief's throne in Grommash Hold. She paused, her sharp ears picking up the sound of familiar footsteps. The tanned hide that served as a nod to privacy was drawn aside, and the newcomer entered. "You are late. Another quarter of an hour and I would have been forced to ride without my champion beside me." He bowed. "Forgive me, my queen. I have been about your business, and it took longer than expected." She was unarmed, but he carried a bow and bore a quiver full of arrows. The only human ever to become a ranger, he was a superlative marksman. It was one reason he was the best bodyguard Sylvanas
could possibly have. There were other reasons, too, reasons that had their roots in the distant past, when the two had connected under a bright and beautiful sun and had fought for bright and beautiful things. Death had claimed them both, human and elf alike. Little now was bright and beautiful, and much of the past they had shared had grown dim and hazy. But not all of it. Although Sylvanas had left behind most warmer emotions the moment she had risen from the dead as a banshee, anger somehow had retained its heat. But she felt it subside to embers now. She seldom stayed angry for long at Nathanos Marris, known now as Blightcaller. And he had indeed been about her business, visiting the Undercity, while she had been saddled with duties that had kept her here in Orgrimmar. She wanted to reach for his hand but contented herself with smiling benevolently at him. "You are forgiven," she said. "Now. Tell me of our home." Sylvanas expected a brief recitation of modest concerns, a reaffirmation of the Forsaken's loyalty to their Dark Lady. Instead, Nathanos frowned. "The situation...is complicated, my queen." Her smile faded. What could possibly be "complicated" about it? The Undercity belonged to the Forsaken, and they were her people. "Your presence has been sorely missed," he said. "While many are proud that at last the Horde has a Forsaken as its warchief, there are some who feel that you have perchance forgotten those who have been more loyal to you than any other." She laughed sharply and without humor. "Baine and Saurfang and the others say I have not been giving them enough attention. My people say I have been giving them too much. Whatever I do, someone objects. How can anyone rule like this?" She shook her pale head. "A curse upon Vol'jin and his loa. I should have stayed in the shadows, where I could be effective without being interrogated." Where I could do as I truly wished.
She'd never wanted this. Not really. As she had told the troll Vol'jin before, during the trial of the late and greatly unlamented Garrosh Hellscream, she liked her power, her control, on the subtle side. But with quite literally his dying breath, Vol'jin, the Horde's leader, had commanded that she do the opposite. He had claimed he had been granted a vision by the loa he honored. You must step out of da shadows and lead. You must be warchief. Vol'jin had been someone she respected, although they had clashed on occasion. He lacked the abrasiveness that so often characterized orc leadership. And she had been genuinely sorry he had fallen-and not just because of the responsibility he had placed on her head. She had opened her mouth to ask Nathanos to continue when she heard the thump-thump of a spear butt on the stone floor outside the small room. Sylvanas closed her eyes, trying to gather patience. "Enter," she growled. One of the Kor'kron, the elite orc guards of the hold, obeyed and stood at attention, his green face unreadable. "Warchief," he said, "it is time. Your people await you." Your people. No. Her people were back in the Undercity, missing her and feeling slighted, unaware that she would like nothing more than to return and be among them once more. "I will be out momentarily," Sylvanas said, adding, in case the guard did not understand what was behind the words, "Leave us." The orc saluted and withdrew, letting the skin flap fall into place. "We will continue this as we ride," she told Nathanos. "And I have other things I wish to discuss with you as well." "As my queen wishes," Nathanos replied.
-
A few years earlier, Garrosh Hellscream had pushed to have a massive celebration in Orgrimmar to commemorate the end of the Northrend campaign. He wasn't warchief-not then. There had been a parade of
every veteran who wished to participate, their path strewn with imported pine boughs, and a gigantic feast awaited them at the end of the route. It had been extravagant, and expensive, and Sylvanas had no intention of following in the footsteps of Hellscream, not just in this situation but in any. He had been arrogant, brutal, impulsive. His decision to attack Theramore with a devastating mana bomb had the softer races wrestling with their consciences, although the only thing that had truly troubled Sylvanas about it was the orc's timing. Sylvanas had loathed him and had secretly conspired-regrettably without success-to kill him even after he had been arrested and charged with war crimes. When, inevitably, Garrosh had been killed, Sylvanas had been immensely pleased. Varok Saurfang, the leader of the orcs, and Baine Bloodhoof, high chieftain of the tauren, had borne no love for Garrosh either. But they had pushed Sylvanas to make a public appearance in Orgrimmar and at least some kind of gesture to mark the end of the war. Brave members of this Horde you lead fought and died to make sure the Legion did not destroy this world, as the demons have so many others, the young bull had intoned. He had been but one step away from openly rebuking her. Sylvanas recalled Saurfang's thinly veiled...warning? Threat? You are the leader of all the Horde-orcs, tauren, trolls, blood elves, pandaren, goblins-as well as the Forsaken. You must never forget that, or else they might. What I will not forget, orc, she thought, ire rising in her anew, are those words. So now, instead of returning home and addressing the Forsaken's concerns, Sylvanas sat astride one of her bony skeletal horses, waving to the throngs of celebrants who crowded the streets of Orgrimmar. The march-she had taken care that no one referred to it as a "parade"-officially began at the entrance to the Horde capital. On one side of the gargantuan gates were clusters of the blood elves and Forsaken who inhabited the city. The blood elves were all dressed splendidly in their predictable
colors of red and gold. At their head was Lor'themar Theron. He rode a red-plumed hawkstrider and met her gaze evenly. Friends, they had been. Theron had served under a living Sylvanas when she was ranger-general of the high elves. They had been comrades in arms, much like the one who rode beside her as her champion. But whereas Nathanos, a mortal human in years past and now Forsaken, had kept his unswerving loyalty to her, Sylvanas knew that Theron's was to his people. People who had been just like her once. They were just like her no more. Theron inclined his head. He would serve, at least for the moment. Not one for speeches, Sylvanas merely nodded back and turned to the group of Forsaken. They stood patiently, as always, and she was proud of them for that. But she could not show favoritism, not here. So she gave them the same greeting she had given Lor'themar and the sin'dorei, then nudged her steed to move through the gate. The blood elves and the Forsaken fell in line, riding behind so as not to crowd her. That had been her stipulation, and she had stood firm on it. She wanted to be able to snatch at least a few moments of privacy. There were things meant for her champion's ears alone. "Tell me more about the thoughts of my people," she ordered. "From their perspective," the dark ranger resumed, "you were a fixture in the Undercity. You made them, you worked to prolong their existence, you were everything to them. Your ascension to warchief was so sudden, the threat so great and so immediate, that you left no one behind to care for them." Sylvanas nodded. She supposed she could understand that. "You left a great hole. And holes in power tend to be filled." Her red eyes widened. Was he speaking of a coup? The queen's mind flashed back a few years to the betrayal of Varimathras, a demon she had thought would obey her. He had joined with the ungrateful wretch Putress, a Forsaken apothecary who had created a plague against both the living and the undead and who had nearly killed
Sylvanas herself. Retaking the Undercity had been a bloody endeavor. But no. Even as the thought occurred to her, she knew that her loyal champion would not be speaking in so casual a manner if something so terrible had happened. Reading her expression perfectly, as he so often did, Nathanos hastened to reassure her. "All is calm there, my queen. But in the absence of a single powerful leader, the inhabitants of your city have formed a governing body to tend to the population's needs." "Ah, I see. An interim organization. That is...not unreasonable." The warchief's path through the city would take her first through an alley lined with shops called the Drag and then to the Valley of Honor. The Drag had once been an apt name for the area, which had abutted a canyon wall in a less than savory part of the city before the Cataclysm. With that terrible event, the Drag, like so much of beleaguered Azeroth, had physically shifted. Like Sylvanas Windrunner herself, it had emerged from the shadows. Sunlight now illuminated the winding, hard-packed dirt of the streets. More reputable establishments, such as clothing shops and ink supply stores, seemed to be springing up as well. "They are calling themselves the Desolate Council," Nathanos continued. "A rather self-pitying name," Sylvanas murmured. "Perhaps," Nathanos agreed. "But it is a clear indicator of their feelings." He glanced over at her as they rode. "My queen, there are rumors about things that you have done in this war. Some of those rumors are even true." "What kind of rumors?" she asked, perhaps too quickly. Sylvanas had plans upon plans, and wondered which of them had seeped into the realm of rumor among her people. "Word has reached them of some of your more extreme efforts to continue their existence," Nathanos said. Ah. That. "I assume that word has also reached them that Genn Greymane destroyed their hope," Sylvanas replied bitterly. She had taken her flagship, the Windrunner, to Stormheim in the
Broken Isles in search of more Val'kyr to resurrect the fallen. It was, thus far, the only way Sylvanas had found to create more Forsaken. "I was almost able to enslave the great Eyir. She would have given me the Val'kyr for all eternity. None of my people would have ever died again." She paused. "I would have saved them." "That...is the concern." "Do not dance around this, Nathanos. Speak plainly." "Not all of them desire for themselves what you desire for them, my queen. Many on the Desolate Council harbor deep reservations." His face, still that of a dead man but better preserved because of an elaborate ritual she had ordered performed, twisted in a smile. "This is the peril you created when you gave them free will. They are now free to disagree." Her pale brows drew together in a terrible frown. "Do they want extinction, then?" she hissed, anger flaring brightly inside her. "Do they want to be rotting in the earth?" "I do not know what they want," Nathanos replied calmly. "They wish to speak with you, not with me." Sylvanas growled softly under her breath. Nathanos, ever patient, waited. He would obey her in all things, she knew. She could, right now, order a group of any combination of non-Forsaken Horde warriors to march on the Undercity and seize the members of this ungrateful council. But even as she had that satisfying thought, she knew it would be unwise. She needed to know more-much more- before she could act. She would prefer to dissuade Forsaken-any Forsaken-than destroy them. "I...will consider their request. But for now I have something else I wish to discuss. We need to increase what is in the Horde's coffers," Sylvanas murmured quietly to her champion. "We will need the funds, and we will need them." She waved at a family of orcs. Both the male and the female bore battle scars, but they were smiling, and the child they lifted over their heads to see her warchief was plump and healthy-looking. Clearly, some of the Horde loved their warchief.
"I'm not sure I understand, my queen," Nathanos said. "Of course, the Horde needs funds and its members." "It is not the members that concern me. It is the army. I have decided I will not dissolve it." He turned to look at her. "They think they've come home," he said. "Is this not the case?" "It is, for the moment," she said. "Injuries need time to heal. Crops need to be planted. But soon I will call upon the brave fighters of the Horde for another battle. The one you and I have both longed for." Nathanos was silent. She did not take that for disagreement or disapproval. He was often silent. That he did not press her for more details meant that he understood what she wanted. Stormwind.
The peace-hungry boy-king Anduin Wrynn had lost his father and by all accounts had taken it badly. There were rumors that he had recovered Shalamayne and was now fighting with cold steel as well as with the Light. Sylvanas was dubious. She had difficulty imagining the sensitive child doing such things. She had respected Varian. She had even liked him. And the specter of the Legion had been so dreadful that she had been willing to put aside the hatred that fueled her now as food and drink had fueled her in life. But the Wolf was gone, and the young lion was still a cub, really, and the humans had taken tremendous losses. They were weak. Vulnerable. Prey. And Sylvanas was a hunter. The Horde was tough. Strong. Battle-hardened. Its members would recover far more swiftly than the Alliance races. They would need less time for the things she had cited; crops, healing, a chance to pause and restore themselves. Soon enough, they would thirst for blood, and she would offer the red life-fluid of Stormwind's humans, the oldest enemies of the Horde, to slake that thirst.
And in the bargain she would increase the population of the Forsaken. For all the humans who fell with their city would be reborn to serve her. Would that be so terrible, really? They would be with their loved ones for all time. They would not suffer the daggers of passion or loss any longer. They would need no sleep. They could pursue their interests in death as well as in life. There would at last be unity. If the humans only understood how terribly life and all its attendant suffering dealt with them, Sylvanas thought, they would leap at the chance. The Forsaken understood...at least, she had thought they did, until the Desolate Council had inexplicably concluded otherwise. Baine Bloodhoof, Varok Saurfang, Lor'themar Theron, and Jastor Gallywix would no doubt consider that Sylvanas had a certain interest in creating human corpses. They had not become leaders of their people by being stupid, after all. But they also would be fighting against the hated humans and claiming their shining white city, with its neighboring forested land and bountiful fields, for their own. They would not begrudge her the bodies, not when she handed them such a victory-one both practical and highly symbolic. There was no longer a human hero to stand and rally the Alliance against them. No Anduin Lothar, who was slain by Orgrim Doomhammer, and no Llane or Varian Wrynn. The only one by those names was Anduin Wrynn, and he was nothing. Sylvanas, Nathanos, and her entourage of veterans had gone all the way through the Valley of Honor and looped back, heading into the Valley of Wisdom. There Baine awaited her. He stood in full traditional tauren regalia, only his ears and tail moving as they flicked off the flies that buzzed in the summer air. Many of his braves were gathered around him. Mounted, Sylvanas was tall enough to look even the males in the eye, and she did so steadily. Baine stared calmly back. Except for those pandaren who had chosen to ally with the Horde, Sylvanas had the least in common with the tauren. They were a deeply spiritual people, calm and steady. They craved the tranquillity of nature and honored ancient ways. Sylvanas once had understood those sentiments but no longer could relate to any of them.
What irked her the most about Baine was that despite the murder of his father and wrong upon wrong being heaped upon his horned head, the young bull still cherished peace above all pursuits: peace between races and in one's own heart. Baine's honor obligated him to serve her, and he would not tarnish it. Not unless he was pushed to limits that Sylvanas still hadn't reached. He placed his hand on his broad chest, over his heart, and stamped his hoof in a tauren version of a salute. The braves followed suit, and the ground of Orgrimmar trembled ever so slightly. Then Sylvanas continued, and the tauren fell in line behind the cluster of Forsaken and Theron's blood elves. Still Nathanos remained silent. They followed the twining road toward the Valley of Spirits, the long-standing seat of the trolls. They were so proud of themselves, these "first" few races. Sylvanas believed that they never truly accepted the later races-the blood elves, the goblins, and her own people-as "true" Horde members. It amused her that, since the goblins had joined the Horde, they had oozed into the Valley of Spirits and had nearly ruined their allotted area. Like the tauren, the trolls were among the first friends to the orcs. The orc leader Thrall had named the land Durotar for his father, Durotan. Orgrimmar was so named to honor an early warchief of the Horde, Orgrim Doomhammer. In fact, until Vol'jin, all warchiefs had been orcs. And until Sylvanas, they all had been members of the original founding races. And male. Sylvanas had changed all that, and she was proud of it. Like her, Vol'jin had left his people leaderless upon his ascension to warchief. The trolls stood today with no public face to represent them, save potentially Rokhan; at least the Forsaken had her in the role of warchief. Sylvanas reminded herself to appoint someone head of the trolls as swiftly as possible. Someone she could work with. Could control. The last thing she needed was for the trolls to choose someone who might want to challenge her position. Although many today had greeted her with cheers and smiles,
Sylvanas did not fool herself that she was universally beloved. She had led the Horde to a seemingly impossible victory, and for now, at least, it appeared that its members were solidly with her. Good. She nodded courteously to the trolls, then braced herself to meet the next group. Sylvanas did not much care for goblins. Although her own sense of honor was somewhat fluid, she could appreciate honor in others. It was, like many things, an echo of something she once had heard. But the goblins were little better than squat, ugly money-grubbing parasites as far as she was concerned. Oh, they were intelligent. Sometimes dangerously so-to themselves and others. That they were creative and inventive there was no doubt. But she preferred the days when the only relationship one had with them was purely financial. Now they were full-fledged members of the Horde, and she had to pretend that they mattered. They, of course, were not without their leader: the multi-chinned, waistband-straining green lump of greed that was Trade Prince Jastor Gallywix. He stood in the front of his motley gaggle of goblins, all of them grinning and showing their sharp yellow teeth. His spindly legs seemed already too tired to bear his frame, and he sported his favorite top hat and cane. At her approach, he bowed as deeply as his midsection would permit. "Warchief," he said in that unctuous voice, "I hope you might find some time for me later. I have something that might interest you a very great deal." No one else had dared try to insert their own agenda this day. Trust a goblin to do so. She frowned at him and opened her mouth to speak. Then she looked carefully at his expression. Sylvanas had lived a very long life before Arthas Menethil had cut her down. And now she lived, after a fashion, again. She had spent much of that time looking into faces, judging the character behind them and the words that were spoken. Gallywix often had that sort of hail-fellow-well-met artificial cheer
that she so despised, but not today. There was no desperate push from him. He was...calm. He looked like a player who knew he was going to win. That he so boldly addressed her here, now, meant that he was serious about speaking with her. But his body language-he wasn't hunching obsequiously but stood straight for perhaps the first time she'd ever seen-told her even more clearly that this was someone willing to walk away from the table without undue disappointment. This time he meant it. He did have something that would interest her a very great deal. "Speak with me at the feast," she said. "As my warchief commands," the goblin said, and doffed his top hat to her. Sylvanas turned away to complete the route. "I do not trust that goblin." Nathanos, who had remained so silent for so long, spoke with distaste. "Nor do I," Sylvanas replied. "But one thing goblins understand is profit. I can listen without promising anything." Nathanos nodded. "Of course, Warchief." The goblins and the trolls had fallen in line behind her. Gallywix was riding in a litter behind Sylvanas's own guards. How he had finagled that position, she didn't know. He met her gaze and grinned, giving her a thumbs-up and a wink. Sylvanas fought to keep her lip from curling in disgust. She already was regretting her decision to talk with Gallywix later, so she focused on something else. "We do still agree, do we not?" she said to Nathanos. "Stormwind must fall, and the victims of the battle will become Forsaken." "All is as you would wish it, my queen," he said, "but I do not think mine is the opinion with which you need to concern yourself. Have you broached this with the other leaders? They may have something to say about the idea. I do not think we have seen a peace more dearly bought, nor more appreciated. They may not want to upend the cart just yet." "While our enemies remain, peace is not victory." Not when vulnerable prey yet remained to be hunted. And not when the
continued existence of her Forsaken was so uncertain. "For the warchief!" a tauren bellowed, his oversized lungs enabling the cry to carry far. "Warchief! Warchief! Warchief!" The long "victory march" was nearing its end. Now Sylvanas approached Grommash Hold. Only one more leader awaited her-one to whom she gave grudging respect. Varok Saurfang was intelligent, strong, fierce, and, like Baine, loyal. But there was something in the orc's eyes that always put her on alert when she gazed into them. The knowledge that if she misstepped too badly, he might well challenge, or even outright oppose, her. That look was in his eyes now as he stepped forward. He met Sylvanas stare for stare, not breaking eye contact even as he executed a brief bow and stepped aside to let her pass before he fell in line behind her. As all the others would do. Warchief Sylvanas dismounted and entered Grommash Hold with her head held high. Nathanos was concerned that the other leaders wouldn't support her plan. I will tell them what they will do...when the time is right.
-
A heavy, rough-hewn wooden table and benches had been brought into Grommash Hold. A celebratory feast would be served for the leaders of each group and a select few of their guards or companions. Sylvanas herself would sit at the head of the table, as befitted her position. Now, as Sylvanas regarded her tablemates, she reflected that none of them had family of any sort. Her champion was the closest thing to a formal consort or even companion present. And their relationship was complicated, even to themselves. Each of the races had been encouraged to present a ritual
celebrating victory or honoring its veterans. Sylvanas was willing to indulge this request; it would appease many, and the funds for such an event would come not from Horde coffers but from those of each race. The idea had been suggested by Baine, of course, whose people had practiced such rituals as part of their culture for...well, as long as there had been tauren, Sylvanas assumed. The trolls, too, had agreed to participate, as well as the Horde's pandaren. They had a unique position among the Horde in that they were a collection of individuals who felt a connection to the Horde's ideals. Their leader, and their land, was far away, but they had proven their worth to the Horde. They had nodded their furry round heads at the prospect of presenting a ritual, promising beauty and spectacle to uplift the spirits. Sylvanas had smiled pleasantly and told them that such would be welcomed. Sylvanas recalled that once, Quel'Thalas used to host magnificent, bright, shining ceremonies with mock battles and pomp and pageantry. But in more recent times the former high elves, wrestling with betrayal and addiction, had turned much grimmer. Quel'Thalas was recovering, and the blood elves still loved their luxuries and comforts, but they now found such ostentatious displays distasteful in the light of so much unrelenting tragedy for their people. Their contribution, Theron had told her, would be brief and to the point. They were bitter now. Bitter as the Forsaken still were; Sylvanas had flatly refused to participate in what she perceived as a waste of time and gold. In this, the goblins were on her side. It was a darkly amusing thought. She waited as several shaman of all races opened the ceremonies with a ritual. The tauren offered a re-creation of one of the great battles of the war. And finally, the pandaren stepped into the center of Grommash Hold. They wore silk outfits-tunics and breeches and dresses-in hues of jade green, sky blue, and nauseating pink. Sylvanas had to admit, for as large and soft and round as the pandaren appeared, they were startlingly graceful as they danced, tumbled, and staged mock battles.
Baine rose to close the events. Slowly, his gaze roamed the hall, taking in not just the leaders at the table but others who sat on rugs and hides on the hard-packed dirt floor. "It is with both pain and pride that we gather here today," he rumbled. "Pain, for many brave heroes of the Horde fell in honorable and terrible battle. Vol'jin, warchief of the Horde, led the vanguard against the Legion. He fought with courage. He fought for the Horde." "For the Horde," came the solemn murmur. Baine turned to look at something. Sylvanas followed his gaze and saw Vol'jin's weapons and ritual mask hanging in a place of honor. Others, too, bowed their heads. Sylvanas inclined her own. "But we do not forget the pride we hold in those battles-and their outcome. For against all odds, we have vanquished the Legion. Our victory was bought with blood, but it was bought. We bled. Now we heal. We mourned. Now we celebrate! For the Horde!" The response was no hushed, respectful one this time but a fullthroated, openhearted cheer that all but shook the rafters of the hold. "For the Horde!" Roasted boar and root vegetables were served, with ale, wine, or harder liquor to wash it down. Sylvanas observed while others partook. Shortly after the first course was cleared, she noticed a red and purple top hat splotched with stars heading toward her end of the table. "Oh, Warchief? A moment of your time." "One moment," Sylvanas told the grinning goblin. He halted beside her chair. "You have my attention. Do not waste it." "I'm certain you'll agree that I'm not, Warchief," he said again with that air of complete confidence. "But first a little background. I'm sure you're aware of the tragedies and challenges the Bilgewater Cartel faced before we were invited to join the Horde." "Yes. Your island was destroyed by an erupting volcano," Sylvanas said. Gallywix looked unconvincingly sad. He touched a gloved finger to his eye to wipe away a nonexistent tear. "So many lost," he sighed. "So
much kaja'mite gone, just like that." Sylvanas amended her thought. Perhaps the tears were genuine. "Kaja'Cola." The goblin sniffled nostalgically. " 'It gives you ideas.' " "Yes, I am aware there is no more kaja'mite," Sylvanas said flatly. "Get to the point, assuming you have one." Her conversation with the goblin was drawing undue attention from Baine and Saurfang, among others. "Oh, yes indeedy, I most certainly do. You know," he said, laughing a little, "it's kind of funny. There's a distinct possibility that that volcano...might not have been caused by Deathwing or the Cataclysm." Her glowing eyes widened slightly. Was he really saying what she thought he was? She waited with an impatience that was not usually associated with the dead. "You see, hmm...how to put this?" He drummed his fingers against his first chin. "We were mining rather deeply on Kezan. We had to keep our customers happy, now, didn't we? Kaja'Cola being the delicious, brain-boosting beverage that-" "Do not push me, goblin." "Gotcha. So. Back to my tale. We were digging deep. Very deep. And we found something unexpected. A hitherto unknown substance. Something truly phenomenal. Unique! Only a small vein of liquid that turned solid and changed color once exposed to the air. One of my smarter miners, ah...recovered a chunk of it privately and brought it to me as a token of his esteem." "In other words, he stole it and tried to bribe you with it." "That's one way of looking at it. But that's not the point. The point is that while that awful Deathwing certainly had a lot to do with triggering the volcano, digging that deep may-may, I repeat, I'm not at all certain of it-have contributed." Sylvanas regarded the trade prince with newfound awe at the depths of his avarice and selfishness. If Gallywix was right, he'd cheerfully destroyed his own island and a goodly number of innocent-well, comparatively innocent-goblins along with it. All for a piece of some kind of marvelous ore.
"I did not know you had it in you," she said almost in a tone of admiration. He seemed about to thank her, then thought better of it. "Well. It was a very special mineral, I must say." "And I imagine you keep it locked away in a very secure location." Gallywix opened his mouth, then slitted his eyes and looked mistrustfully at Nathanos. Sylvanas almost laughed. "My champion Nathanos is a dour sort. He barely speaks, even to me. Any secrets you have to share with me are more than safe with him." "As my warchief says," Gallywix replied slowly, clearly unconvinced but seeing no other option. "You are incorrect, Dark Lady. I do not keep it hidden away. I keep it in plain sight, literally close at hand." He used the golden-hued tip of his cane to push back his hideous top hat in a casual gesture. Sylvanas waited for an answer. When a moment passed and she received none, she started to frown. The goblin's tiny eyes moved, flickering to the top of his cane and then back to Sylvanas. The cane? She looked at it again, more closely this time. She'd never paid it much attention. She never paid much attention to anything Gallywix wore, carried, or said. But something was nagging at her. Then she knew what it was. "It used to be red." "It used to be," he agreed. "It isn't now." Sylvanas realized that the small orb, only about the size of an apple, was not actually made of gold. It was made of something that looked like...like... Amber. Tree sap that over the centuries had hardened to become something that could be crafted into jewelry. Sometimes ancient insects had gotten caught in the flowing fluid, forever enveloped by it. This one had that same warmth to it. It was pretty. But she was skeptical that this harmless-looking decoration was as all-powerful as Gallywix would have her believe. "Let me see it," she demanded. "I will happily do so, but not in front of prying eyes. Can we go someplace a little less public?" At her irritated glance, he said in the
sincerest voice she had ever heard from him, "Look. You are gonna want to keep this information close. Trust me on this." Oddly, she did. "If you are exaggerating, you will suffer." "Oh, I know that. And I also know you're going to like what you find out." Sylvanas leaned over and murmured to Nathanos. "I will be back momentarily. He had best be right." Aware of the eyes on her, she rose and indicated that Gallywix might follow her back to the room behind the throne. He did so, and as the skin flap dropped closed, he said, "Huh. I never knew this place was here." Sylvanas did not reply, instead simply extending her hand for the cane. With a little bow, he handed it to her. Her hand closed around it. Nothing. The decoration was garish, but Sylvanas could see now that it was of fine craftsmanship. She was rapidly tiring of the goblin's game. She frowned slightly and slipped one hand up the cane's shaft to the gem that was perched atop it. Her eyes flew wide, and she sucked in a soft gasp of astonishment. Once she had mourned the life denied to her. She had contented herself with the gifts of her undeath: her devastating banshee wail, the freedom from hunger and exhaustion, and the other shackles that tethered mortals. But this sensation dwarfed them both. She felt not merely strong but mighty. As if her grip could crush a skull, as if a single stride could cover a league and more. Energy coiled inside each muscle, straining like a beast of pure precision and power against a leash. Thoughts raced through her brain, not simply her usual calculating, cunning, clever thoughts but shining, frighteningly brilliant ones. Innovative. Creative. She was no longer a dark lady or even a queen. She was a goddess of destruction and creation, and she was stunned that she had never understood how deeply the two were intertwined. Armies, cities, entire cultures-she could raise them. And fell them. Stormwind would be among the first, yielding its
people to swell the numbers of her own. She could deal death on a scale that- Sylvanas released the orb as if it had burned her. "This...will change everything." Her voice was shaking. She summoned her usual icy calm. "Why have you not used this ere now?" "It was gold when it was liquid, see, and it was amazing. Then it became solid and red, and it was pretty but ordinary. I always held out hope I'd find more of the stuff one day. And then...one day, boom, the top of the cane turned gold and amazing again. Who knew?" Sylvanas needed to get back to the feast. The other leaders doubtless were talking already. She didn't intend to give them more fodder by lingering here. "You see the possibilities," the goblin said as they reentered the hold. As if he were talking about something mundane and pragmatic, not something that had shaken Sylvanas Windrunner to her very core with a taste of power hitherto unimaginable. "I do," she said, her voice under control again, though inside she still trembled. "Once this feast is finished, you and I will talk at length. This will serve the Horde well." Only the Horde. "The Alliance knows nothing of this?" "Don't worry, Warchief," he said, his old glib self again. "I got people on it."
Anduin summoned his counselors to join him in Stormwind Keep's map room. They inclined their heads as he entered; he had long ago bidden them not to bow. Greymane and Shaw were there, of course. So was Prophet Velen, the ancient draenei who had tutored Anduin in the ways of the Light. Of all of them, it could be said that perhaps the draenei Prophet had lost the most in this war. Genn had lost his son to violence in years past, and of course this war had claimed Varian Wrynn. But Velen had witnessed the death not only of his son but of his entire world-quite literally. And yet, Anduin mused as he regarded the lavender-skinned being, though I can sense his sorrow, he remains the most serene of us all. Sky Admiral Catherine Rogers was also present. Anduin had similar sentiments toward her as he did toward Spymaster Shaw. Anduin respected both individuals, but his relationship with them wasn't comfortable. Rogers was too thirsty for Horde blood for his liking. He had forcefully rebuked both her and Greymane for taking a recent assignment much further than he had ordered. But the Alliance had
needed Rogers's hawkishness in the war, and Mathias protected the innocent in his own way. "It has been a difficult day," Anduin said. "But it was more difficult for those we addressed. In the end, the war is over, the Legion is defeated, and we can bury the dead knowing that tomorrow will not contribute to the numbers of those slain in battle. And for this I am grateful. "However, it does not mean that we can cease our efforts toward making this world better. Instead of slaying our enemies, we must heal and restore our people-and a world that is dreadfully wounded. And," Anduin added, "we must protect and study a precious resource that has come to my attention just today. All these things pose a fresh set of challenges." Anduin could sense the small golden-blue stone in his pocket, nestled there quietly and benevolently. He knew very little about it yet, but one thing he did know: it was not evil, though he understood full well that it certainly could be turned to dark purposes. Even the naaru could. Anduin withdrew the handkerchief. "This morning, Spymaster Shaw reported to me about what he has observed in Silithus. Not only are there great fissures that have erupted, spreading out from where the sword of Sargeras impaled the world, but those fissures have revealed a hitherto unknown substance. It's...unique. It's easier to show you how rather than tell you." He handed the handkerchief to Velen, who reacted as Anduin had. The draenei took in a startled breath. Almost before Anduin's eyes, years-decades-of suffering seemed to be lifted. As profound as it had been to experience it himself, it was almost more moving for Anduin to witness the material's effect on another. "For a moment, I thought it a piece of a naaru," Velen breathed. "It is not, but the sensation is...similar." The naaru were benevolent beings made of holy energy. Nothing was closer to the Light than they. When Anduin had studied under the draenei at the Exodar, he had spent much time in the presence of the
naaru O'ros. The beautiful, benevolent being had been another casualty of the war, and the memory of that time was now tinged with pain. Even so, Anduin recalled the emotions O'ros had engendered, and he agreed with Velen's assessment. "Although," Velen added, "there is the potential for great harm here, as well as great good." Greymane took it next. He seemed stunned by what he experienced, almost confused by it, as if some deep, firmly held belief had been shattered. Then he frowned, the lines around his eyes deepening, and he thrust the honey-hued stone toward Shaw. "I admit," he said in a rough voice, directing his words to both the king and the spymaster, "I thought perhaps you were exaggerating. You weren't. This stuff is powerful-and dangerous." Shaw waved the stone away; he seemed to have no desire to handle it more than was necessary. Anduin respected that. Rogers took it next. She stumbled, reaching out to grasp the side of the large map table for balance, gazing raptly at the tiny piece of stone. Then her expression turned to one of anger and hope commingled. "Is there more of this?" Shaw gave Velen and Rogers an edited version of what he'd told Genn and Anduin earlier. The two listened intently. When he had finished, Rogers said, "If we can find a way to use this...we could crush the Horde." "The thought of Sylvanas with this sickens me," Genn said, not mincing words. Why must we bend everything to violence? Anduin thought with his own hint of anger. Instead he said, answering Rogers's first question, "I told Spymaster Shaw we must obtain more of this and study it. I believe there are far better things we can do with this substance than create methods to kill more efficiently." "Sylvanas wouldn't think so, and neither must we." Anduin leveled his blue-eyed gaze at Greymane. "I would say that what makes us better than her is that we do think so." As Genn started to protest, Anduin lifted a hand. "But I would never leave the Alliance
vulnerable. With enough information, we can apply our skills to more than one task." He squared his shoulders and turned his attention to the map of Azeroth spread before him, his blue eyes roaming the image of a world that had become newly precious to him. His gaze lingered on the home of Stormwind's nearest ally, the dwarven lands and their capital city of Ironforge. "Humans did not stand alone against the Legion," Anduin reminded those assembled. "We were joined in that fight by the draenei and those pandaren who had chosen the Alliance. Your people, too, Genn: worgen and human refugees who have more than earned their place in the Alliance by standing shoulder to shoulder first with my father and then with me to face that awful peril. The dwarves and the gnomes also stood with us." "If not quite shoulder to shoulder," Genn said. Anduin had discovered that the softer emotions tended to make the gruff king uncomfortable. Genn wore rage and stubbornness better than warmth or gratitude. So, too, had Varian for many years. "Perhaps not," Anduin said, smiling a little; the joke was one at which the dwarves themselves probably would guffaw. He envisioned their former king, Magni Bronzebeard, retorting with something like Nae worries, lad, we'll cut ye down tae size. "But they have always been there for us, as sturdy and undefeatable as stone." Affection for these strong, hardheaded people, who had been the ones to start him along both his path to the priesthood as well as toward proper fighting technique, swept through Anduin. "We should take this to the Explorers' League. They might have some insight that we lack. And they are all over the world. That's a lot of extra eyes and ears for you, Shaw." Shaw nodded his reddish-brown head. Anduin continued. "The night elves might also be of assistance. As ancient as their race is, perhaps they have encountered something like this before. They, too, lost many in this war, and I believe a pledge of aid and support would be welcome. And the draenei-" Anduin reached to touch the arm of his old friend Velen. "You have lost more than any of us can fully comprehend. And as you say, this...material...evokes the naaru.
Perhaps there is some kind of connection." He returned his attention to the group. "All came when we called. And now their veterans have returned to fields too long neglected, to supplies dangerously depleted. We remember what happened after the battle for Northrend. When resources are depleted, sparks of resentment can turn to a conflagration-even among races on the same side. Let us make sure that none of our allies regret having offered aid to Stormwind." They were looking at one another, nodding in agreement. "I intend to travel to the lands of our steadfast friends," Anduin informed them. "To thank them in person for their sacrifices, to offer what we can so their economic recovery will be swift, and to enlist their aid as well." He had expected Greymane to protest, and the older man did not disappoint. "Your people are in Stormwind," Genn reminded the king unnecessarily. "They need you here. And Gilneas, at least, needs no royal visit." No. Gilneas did not. It never had. In years past, by the order of Greymane himself, Gilneas had cut itself off from all contact with anything outside its massive stone walls. The kingdom had not come to the aid of others when they were in need, and that isolation had evoked anger and resentment toward the Gilneans, at least at the outset, when they at last had been forced to abandon their selfimposed seclusion. But now there was nothing left of the once great realm but ruins, shades, and sorrow. "You were angry with me, as I recall, when I ventured into the Broken Isles to see the place where my father fell," Anduin replied mildly. "Of course I was. You left Stormwind and told no one," Greymane retorted. "You hadn't even named a successor. Still haven't, by the way. What would have happened if you'd been killed?" "But I wasn't," Anduin countered. "And my leaving was the right thing to do." More gently, he continued. "Genn, you told me I didn't need to see that place. But I did. To me, my father's sacrifice has made
it hallowed ground. It is where I found Shalamayne-or perhaps I should say, where it found me. It is where I..." He paused. He was not yet ready to tell anyone what he had experienced, not even Velen, the Prophet, who would have understood. "Where I truly accepted the mantle of my kingship," he said instead. He cleared his throat; his voice was too thick. "Where I was able to lead the Alliance to a hard-won victory. Yes. Stormwind's people need me. But so do those in Ironforge and Darnassus. This is how we use peace. To lay the groundwork for unity and prosperity so that perhaps war might one day be relegated to the history books." It was a noble goal, but perhaps an unattainable one. Most of those around the table seemed to think the latter. But Anduin was determined to try.
-
"Ol' Emma" was what most people in Stormwind knew her as. She was all right with that nickname; she was old, after all, and it was usually spoken with friendliness. But she had a real name-Felstone-and a past, just like everyone else. She had loved and been loved once, and if sometimes she got lost in the past because, well, that was where everyone was, then so be it. First it was her husband, Jem, who had died in the First War. But people died in war, didn't they? And they were honored and remembered in ceremonies like the ones that sweet boy-king had led. Anduin Wrynn reminded her so much of her own bright boys. Three of them there had been: Little Jem, named for his father; Jack, named for his uncle John; and Jake. They, too, had died in a war, just like her sister, Janice. Except that war was worse than the one that had just ended, in a way. Her sons had perished because of Arthas Menethil and his war on the living. They'd been warriors of Lordaeron, given places of honor as King Terenas's guards. They'd fallen along with their king and their kingdom. But no one honored their names with a formal ceremony. No one thought of them as war heroes. They'd been turned into mindless
undead monstrosities. They were still in that brutally cruel state, were dead, or had become one of the Banshee Queen's Forsaken. Whatever her beautiful sons' final fate, they were lost to her, and the living world of humans spoke of such horrors only in whispers. She gripped the handle of the bucket she carried and focused on her task: drawing water from the well. Thinking of Jem, Jack, and Jake was never a good thing. The places it dragged her mind and heart- Emma gripped the handle of her bucket more tightly as she approached the well. Focus on what the living need, she told herself. Not the dead. Or the undead.
"Iheard that you spoke most eloquently at the service today, Your Majesty." Anduin smiled tiredly at the elderly servant. He was quite capable of preparing for bed himself, but Wyll Benton had taken care of him since he was a little boy and would be offended if his service was refused. "Princes and kings have so much to worry about," he had said once, the first time Anduin had tried to decrease his duties. "The last thing they need is to bother themselves with things like candlewick trimming and hanging their clothes properly." He was tall and heavyset, though Anduin noted that he'd slimmed down some recently. His mild, somewhat detached demeanor disguised a stubborn will and fierce devotion to the house of Wrynn. So much has changed, and most of it not for the better, Anduin thought. But at least Wyll is a constant. "If indeed I was eloquent, it was the Light speaking through me to comfort those in need of it," Anduin replied. "You underestimate yourself, Your Majesty. You've always had a way
with words." Wyll removed Anduin's belt, hanging the mace Fearbreaker reverently from a hook on the wall near the king's bed. The servant himself had mounted the hook there, where Anduin could reach it at any moment. Just in case, he had said. The prince Anduin had been at the time had rolled his eyes at that, but the man he had become felt his heart warm at the unspoken expression of concern of a man who was more than a servant-Wyll was an old friend. "You're too kind," Anduin said. "Oh, sir," Wyll sighed, "I'm never that, as you well know." Anduin pressed his lips together to keep from smiling outright. His spirits lifted, and he couldn't resist teasing Wyll. "You'll be pleased to hear we're going back to Ironforge soon. Unless you'd rather not?" "Why, Your Majesty, why would I not? There's nothing like the constant heat and clanging of a continuously running giant forge to make certain one rests well. Besides, surely nothing bad ever happens in Ironforge. No one gets turned to diamond, or is buried beneath rubble, or taken hostage, or forced to flee for his life," the old servant continued in a voice just shy of sarcastic. Wyll had accompanied Anduin on his last visit to Ironforge, shortly before the Cataclysm had forever altered the face of Azeroth. All the things the servant had just mentioned, along with many others, had occurred on that eventful trip, and two of them had happened to Anduin. The words, meant as a joke-at least as much of a joke as Wyll could manage-caused another wave of sorrow to flow over the young king. This one, though, was different; the loss was older. Time had mellowed the pain, though it would never completely leave him. At his king's silence, Wyll looked at him as he hung up the coat. "Your pardon, Your Majesty," he said, his voice heavy with remorse. "I didn't mean to make light of your loss." "Of Khaz Modan's loss," Anduin said. The earthquake in Dun Morogh, its tremors felt even in Ironforge, had marked the first
indication that the unhappy world was in true peril. Anduin had gone to Dun Morogh to assist with the rescue efforts. He had not yet embraced the path of priesthood, but he knew first aid and desperately wanted to help. The round of aftershocks claimed the life of Aerin Stonehand, the young dwarf woman who had been assigned to train him. It was the first time Anduin had lost anyone close to his age. And, if he was being honest with himself, he had begun to feel more than simple friendship toward the bright-eyed, lively warrior. "It's all right," he reassured Wyll. "Things are better there now. Magni's awoken from his...ah, communing with the earth, I'm just fine, and the Three Hammers are working together like a well-oiled gnomish machine." Magni Bronzebeard, who had been king of Ironforge at the time, had participated in a ritual that would "make him one with the earth." All had hoped the rite would give some insight into the distressed world, but the ritual had been quite literal, not metaphorical. It had turned Magni into diamond. At the time, the already beleaguered city had grieved deeply. Thank the Light, it transpired that Magni had not been killed...but he had been changed. Now, Anduin had been told that the former king spoke with-and for-Azeroth herself. No one was sure where or how to find him; he wandered the world and came when needed. Anduin wondered if he would ever see Magni again. He hoped so. "Even so, sir," Wyll said. "Of course I'll come with you." Of course he would. As far as Anduin knew, the devoted servant had no family of his own, and he had served the Wrynns for most of his life. Anduin didn't need Wyll's tending-he was quite capable of hanging up a coat by himself and removing his own boots-but as increasing age prohibited Wyll from doing many things, Anduin knew his childhood servant still wanted to feel that he was of use. Anduin cherished Wyll not for what he did but for who he was. "I'll be glad of your company," Anduin said, and he was. "That will be all for now, though. Good night, Wyll."
The old man bowed. "Good night, Your Majesty." Anduin watched him close the door, smiling affectionately after him. When the door snicked shut, he turned back to his dressing table. The amber-hued stone, still wrapped in the handkerchief, sat beside two items that held great personal meaning for Anduin. One was a small carved box that contained Queen Tiffin's engagement and wedding rings. The other was the compass Anduin once had given his father. He looked at the white piece of fabric for a moment, but it was the compass he reached for, the same one that had been recovered and returned to him by an adventurer who had helped the distraught new king on his first steps toward healing his grief. He opened the compass now and regarded the portrait of a little boy painted within, cheeks still round with childhood's softness. After all he had beheld and experienced in the last few months, Anduin wondered if he had ever truly been as young as the artist had depicted him. A compass. Something to keep you on the right path. There had been a clear compass in fighting the Burning Legion. Clear, good, true, and powerful. Anduin knew the immediate next step in his path. To meet with his allies, help them aid their own people, and demonstrate how valuable he considered those ties. To ask for their assistance in learning more about this strange mineral-and keep it from being misused. After that... He closed his eyes. Light, he prayed, you have given me good advisers and true who have helped me lead well thus far. I trust in you to show me the next steps in their proper time. I have always longed for peace, and now peace of a sort is upon us. And this material...it could be used to further that peace in ways we can't even begin to imagine. Give me the guidance to lead well now, too. He placed the compass down gently, blew out the single candle Wyll had left burning on the nightstand, and had no dreams.
-
In the morning, Anduin called for a less formal gathering in the receiving room outside his private quarters. He had spent many a night there, dining alone with his father. He still had difficulty thinking of the room as belonging to him now. "I had almost forgotten we were heading into summer," Greymane said as he helped himself to a sweet-smelling, perfectly ripe peach. Amberseed buns, Stromgarde cheese, herbed eggs, ham, bacon, fresh sunfruit, and pastries also had been laid out, and milk, coffee, tea, and a selection of juices were provided to wash it down. As a worgen, Greymane had hunted for food in a way that the rest of the Alliance could not, and could feed upon things others could not. Worgen were, in many ways, the strongest and best suited to war, for the adage that an army marched on its stomach was a true one. But clearly the king of Gilneas still relished the taste of summer's first fruits. It seemed most of them had slept well, as had the young king. He wondered if it was an effect of the stone. After a few pleasantries about the meal, the king steered the conversation to practicalities. "Genn," he said, helping himself to a second serving of eggs, "I would like to ask you to look after my kingdom while I am away. I can't think of anyone better to tend to it than someone already familiar with what that entails. Don't worry," he added, smiling, "I promise I'll formalize it before I leave this time." Slowly, Genn put down his fork. "Your Majesty," he said, "I am honored. I will serve Stormwind as I have served two of its kings. But I am an old man. You might do well to begin looking for a way to have someone younger rule should anything happen to you." Inwardly Anduin sighed. This was not the first time the subject of an heir had been brought up. He chose to ignore it, but he was almost certain that Genn would reference it at least once more before he left for Ironforge even though Anduin had made his opinion quite clear. He was not going to marry a woman he didn't love. "I'm pleased you accept," Anduin said, dodging the entire issue and turning to Velen before Genn could pursue it. "Prophet, I hope you will
accompany me on my journey both to Ironforge and overseas. I have not forgotten the draenei who still guard the Exodar. I would see them and thank them." The white-bearded draenei inclined his head, moved. "It is an honor to accompany you, Your Majesty. It will mean so much to my people." "It will mean much to me as well," Anduin replied, buttering his toast. Butter, he thought. Something he took for granted when so many didn't have so much as a slice of bread. "What can Stormwind offer the draenei to show our deep appreciation for their aid against our mutual enemy?" "That Your Majesty cares enough to even inquire after all that you have endured will surely warm their hearts." The young king placed the butter knife down and regarded his old friend. "You know more of endurance than any of us," he said quietly. "Of suffering, of loss." Liam Greymane was not the only son who had left behind a loving father. More than even this deeply personal loss was the one that Velen's people had suffered. Argus, their beloved homeworld, not only had become overrun with corrupted eredar but had been deliberately tortured for eons by the fallen titan Sargeras. The very soul of that broken world had risen to turn on anyone and everyone, even those who had liberated it and sought to help it. Even now, Anduin could hardly bear to think of it, and he prayed to the Light that their own world, their beautiful Azeroth, which had sustained such varied and marvelous forms of life, would not suffer the same fate. Velen's face softened with sorrow that would never, could never, be assuaged, but his voice was warm as he spoke. "It is precisely because we know so much of the darkness of this universe that we focus instead on that which is good and kind and true. I say again, your presence in the violet halls of our city will soothe our spirits more than you yet understand." There was no arguing with a draenei, Anduin thought. A smile quirked his lips. "It's as you wish, my old friend. But I ask that you set your mind to thinking of something more tangible we can bring as
well." The ancient being's own lips curved in a smile that was eternally youthful. "I will see what I can come up with." "Good. More pressing is what we need to bring to Ironforge, as it's the first city I intend to visit. What can we offer the dwarves as a gift that they would most appreciate?" For a moment, brows were furrowed in contemplation. And then, as one, all of them, even the great Prophet Velen, began to laugh.
Grizzek Fizzwrench stepped outside his simple ramshackle hut into the lazy, slowly fading heat of the late afternoon. He smiled at the familiar sound of the ocean lapping against the shore, the rustle of the palm trees. The nostrils on his large, long nose flared and his narrow chest expanded as he breathed in the salty air. "Another beautiful day all to myself," he said aloud, cracking his neck, knuckles, and toes in a lovely long stretch. Then, with a cackle of anticipation, he plunged into the surf. Once he'd been an ordinary goblin. Just like all the others, he'd lived in cramped, less than hygienic slums and shantytowns, performing unsavory deeds for even more unsavory people. It had been fine when he was on Kezan, but when that island...well, exploded-which islands were really not supposed to do-and the refugees of the Bilgewater Cartel moved to Azshara, things changed. He didn't like Azshara, for one thing. It was too autumnal for his summer spirit. All those orange and red and brown colors. He liked the blue of sky and sea and that bright yellow sand and the soothing waving of green-fronded palm trees. Then, when the shredders began
tearing up the land, rendering it ugly, he disliked Azshara even more. The idea of wasting both time and money-which were kind of one and the same-reshaping a part of Azshara to make a symbol of the Horde seemed like the worst brownnosing Grizzek had ever seen-and he'd seen a lot. And all those other races in the Horde: they just didn't seem to understand the goblin mentality. The "deaders," as he thought of the Forsaken, gave him the creeps, and the only thing they seemed to enjoy tinkering with was poisons. The orcs thought they were better than everyone else. "Original Horde" and all that claptrap. The tauren were too in love with the land to make any reasonable person comfortable, and the whole thing the trolls had going on with the loa scared the crap out of him. Pandaren were just too...well...nice. He'd met a blood elf or two he could share a beer with, but the race as a whole was way too pretty, and they liked pretty things, and goblins and their culture most definitely did not qualify as pretty things. But the very worst part of joining the Horde was that the union had elevated Jastor Gallywix from a simple slimy trade prince to the powerful slimy leader of an entire Horde faction. And then one day, quite suddenly, as if a switch had been flipped, Grizzek had had enough. He had taken everything he owned-all of his laboratory knickknacks, books filled with years of painstakingly detailed notes on experiments, and a small warehouse full of supplies-and moved here, to a deserted beach in Tanaris. Working alone in the sweltering sun, which turned his pale yellowgreen skin to a rich forest-emerald hue, he had constructed a small, modest domicile and a not so small, not very modest laboratory. Grizzek found that he flourished in solitude and sunlight. He rose in the late afternoon, went for a swim, and broke his fast, then headed in to work during the cooler evening and night hours. Over the years, he'd constructed a bristling defense system composed of robots, alarums, whistles, and other warning devices. His favorite such device was Feathers, the unimaginatively named robotic parrot who provided what passed for company. Feathers flew
reconnaissance several times a day, using its mechanical eyes to scan for anything out of the ordinary. It would immediately alert Grizzek to trouble. And then...well, depending on the nature of the intruder, they would be sent off with a gruff warning or else a blast of the Goblin Dragon Gun Mark II he always kept handy. It was a beautiful life. And he had made many beautiful things. Well, beautiful might not be the right word. He'd made things that blew other things up in a spectacular fashion and practical gizmos that made it possible for him not to worry about cooking, cleaning, or, really, anything other than creating more gadgets and explosive devices. And so of course, when Feathers suddenly appeared while he was lying on his back, floating lazily, and squawked loudly, "Intruder alert, west side entrance!" it meant that his beautiful life was probably about to implode. Grizzek grimaced, listening to Feathers's report. When it came to a single name, though, his eyes snapped open. He swore long, loudly, and colorfully, and swam back to shore.
-
"Trade Prince," Grizzek said a few moments later, standing at the main gate, dripping and wearing nothing but a towel. "I thought we had a deal. You got to keep all my inventions, I got to leave the cartel with supplies and peace of mind." Trade Prince Jastor Gallywix, garishly dressed as always, his round bulging tummy preceding him by almost two full paces, merely smiled. He had brought with him several bruisers, including the musclebound Druz, his chief enforcer. "Hey, Druz," Grizzek added. "Yo, Grizzek," Druz replied. "Is this how you greet an old friend?" Gallywix boomed. Grizzek stared at him flatly. "Traditional goblin etiquette demands that you invite in a trade
prince!" "Actually, no," Grizzek shot back. "It don't, and anyway, I ain't never been much for etiquette." Druz leaned against the doorway, cleaning his nails with a knife. The thought of being stabbed with a knife coated with what was under Druz's fingernails was horrifying. Gallywix's smile didn't falter. "Twelve extremely strong goblins, many of them with guns trained on you, demand that you invite in a trade prince." Grizzek drooped. He sighed heavily. "Okay, okay. What's this all about, Gallywix?" he asked, not bothering with the Horde leader's title. "What's it always about?" "Creative expression, intellectual stimulation, and sound sleep at night?" Grizzek offered. "Of course not! This is business. A, shall we say, golden opportunity." Gallywix gestured with his cane. Grizzek's eyes automatically went to the orb perched atop it. He'd seen it a thousand times, that bright red- He blinked. "It's gold," he said. "Not gold gold, but yes." "Ah. So that's the pun." Gallywix's smile faded somewhat, and Grizzek relished the fact that he was getting underneath the trade prince's skin. "Yes," he said. "That's the pun." "It used to be red." Gallywix frowned, and his chins jiggled with irritation. "It did. Same adornment, different color. C'mon, Grizzy, you gotta be intrigued by that at least!" Damn the goblin, Grizzek was intrigued. Curiosity, as it always did, got the better of him. Besides, he could stand having his supplies replenished. I'm gonna regret this, he thought, then opened the gate to admit Gallywix. "Just you," he said as Druz tried to step in. "I only got one
chair." "S'okay. I'll stand," Druz said. What passed for the kitchen was cramped with three goblins crammed into it, and there was indeed only one chair. While Gallywix tried to maneuver his bulk into it, Grizzek excused himself to put on a pair of pants and a linen shirt, then stood and listened. Gallywix spoke of delving too deeply into the heart of Kezan, of the single golden glorious vein they had found that had petered out, of how the power of this substance had surged, then seemingly died as time passed, turning from a warm honey hue to red as a drop of human blood. His eyes initially were fixed on the trade prince, but his gaze wandered toward the cane as the story grew ever more fantastic. "And then," Gallywix was saying, "along comes this giant, titanwhipped-up sword, plunged right into Silithus. The earth opened up, and there were veins and veins of the stuff, flowing like a beautiful river of pure honey. Of course, I and I alone truly understood what it was, so I jumped right on it. Right now, we got lots of people mining it and making sure only the right people get it." "I am deeply skeptical that this stuff is the wonder you think it is, Trade Prince." Grizzek glanced over at Druz for confirmation of the story. Oddly, he and the chief muscle Gallywix employed had always gotten along pretty well. Druz shrugged his massive shoulders. Gallywix's ugly smile deepened, and the small eyes twinkled. "The proof is in the pudding." Grizzek blinked. "What does that even mean?" "No idea, but it sounds good. Look, I'll make a deal with you. Take the cane, touch the top, and see what happens. If you don't want to be involved in working with this stuff, just say the word. I'll be out of your hair." "I'm bald." "Figure of speech." "Okay, but how's about we take it a step further. If you want my help, I get to dictate what I do, what I make, and how it's used." That did not sit well with the top-hatted trade prince. The smile
froze as if Gallywix had run afoul of an angry frost mage. "You're not the only engineer in the world, you know." "True enough. But I know you wouldn't have tracked me down after all this time if you didn't need my help." "Grizzek," Gallywix said, sighing, "you are too smart for your own good." Grizzek waited, arms crossed. "All right, all right," the goblin leader said crossly. "But you only get paid a small percentage." "We'll negotiate my hourly fee and benefits after I decide." Again, Gallywix stuck out the cane. Grizzek grasped it. He closed his other hand over the top. Everything in the room suddenly came into hyperfocus. The color amplified. The lines were sharp, clean. He heard layers in the sound of the ocean, could almost feel the vibrations of birdsong. And his mind- It raced, tumbled pell-mell, analyzing and calculating what percentage of his hand was in contact with the orb, to what degree a callus or the sheen of sweat on his suddenly damp palm inhibited contact, to what uses this could be put- Grizzek snatched his hand away as if it had been burned. It was glorious-almost too much. "Holy mackerel," he muttered. "See?" The engineer's body was still vibrating from the experience, his heart racing, his hands trembling. He knew he had a brilliant mind. He knew he was a genius. It was why Gallywix had sought him out. And the trade prince had been right to do so, because the things that could be created with this stuff... "I, uh...Okay. I'll work on it. Run experiments, design some prototypes." Gallywix's smile was cruelly happy now. "I thought you'd come around." "My demand still stands," Grizzek insisted. "I want full autonomy on
this." He'd betrayed himself earlier with his reaction, he knew, but it wasn't too late to salvage something. He'd been startled, that was all, and now he brought his best poker face to bear. "You're dying to get your hands on it, and you know it." Grizzek shrugged, trying to imitate Druz's utter lack of interest. "Bah, all right," Gallywix huffed. "But I'm going to have some of my people out here from now on." "Go right ahead," Grizzek said. He knew full well that he wouldn't be venturing far from this stuff anyway. "But before we get started, I'm going to write up a list of supplies. And top of that list"-he nodded at the cane tip-"is a sample of that." "You'll get plenty of this. Provided that plenty of new things created with it start leaving here on a regular basis." "Of course, of course. And..." Oh, how he hated to say this. "I have one more request. I'm gonna need my former lab partner to work with me on this." "Sure, sure." Gallywix had gotten what he wanted and clearly was feeling generous. "Gimme a name; I'll get 'em right to you." Grizzek told him. Gallywix almost exploded, but a quarter of an hour later he had relented. It was with both relief and reluctance that Grizzek closed the door of his little hut. He wiped off the chair in which Gallywix had sat, just because, and plopped down into it. This was either the best idea of his life...or the worst. Grizzek suspected the latter.
Anduin had performed all his kingly obligations, observing the proper protocol upon arriving at the massive gates of Ironforge and later during the lengthy formal meal. He'd had to pace himself. Dwarves loved to eat and they loved to drink, and although Anduin was larger than any of them, he was well aware that even the slightest dwarf could drink him under the table if he wasn't careful. Moira Thaurissan, the daughter of Magni Bronzebeard and the leader of the Dark Iron dwarf clan by marriage, was one of the Three Hammers who governed Ironforge. She personally preferred wine to the beloved beer of most dwarves, and she ensured the visiting king was served one of Ironforge's finest reds as they dined on braised boar meat with plenty of hearty brown bread to sop the juices, vegetables roasted with honey, and a mountain of pastries with which to end the meal. Anduin had wanted to convene a meeting with the Three Hammers right away, but they had told him one needed time to digest such a hearty meal. Unless it was a matter of immediate life or death, a pipe, brandy, or more desserts were required first.
Moira, observing Anduin's reaction to the option of any of the three, suggested an hourlong amble around Ironforge instead to help them digest. Anduin gratefully accepted. He invited the draenei to accompany them, but Velen demurred, saying, "You two have much to discuss, I am certain. I will stay here and converse with Muradin and Falstad." Muradin Bronzebeard, the middle brother of the three Bronzebeards, represented his family's clan in the Council of Three Hammers. (The youngest of the famous brothers, Brann, had founded the Explorers' League and had too much wanderlust in him to stay in Ironforge.) Falstad Wildhammer, the third Hammer and the leader of the famed Wildhammer clan, raised a stein to the draenei. "Pipe, brandy, or dessert?" Anduin quipped. "Dessert, I think," Velen replied. "It seems the most innocuous choice." "Have my share. If I eat another bite, I'll burst." "Mind if we have a bit of company?" Moira asked as they rose and left the table. "Of course; anyone you like." The queen spoke quietly with one of the guards, who nodded and stepped out. A few minutes later, he returned, escorting a little dwarf boy. The child's skin was an unusual but appealingly warm shade of gray. His eyes were large and green, holding no hint of the red glow common to the Dark Iron dwarves, and his hair was white. Anduin knew at once who it had to be: Moira's son, Magni Bronzebeard's grandson, and the heir to the throne, Prince Dagran. "I know we've met before, Your Majesty, but I'm afraid I don't remember it," the young prince said with perfect politeness and little more than a trace of the local dwarven accent. How old was he? Six, seven? Anduin recalled that he, too, had been schooled in etiquette and courtesies appropriate to the child of a king when he was even younger than this lad. "I'd be astonished if you did. Let us consider this our first meeting." Anduin leaned forward and extended his hand in a formal manner, and the boy shook it solemnly. "I'm glad you could join us on our walk
today. So...what's your favorite place in Ironforge?" The boy's eyes lit up. "Th' Hall o' Explorers!" Anduin shot Moira a pleased look as he replied, "Mine, too. Let's go!" Once they had reached the hall and had enjoyed looking around it, he would ask Moira to summon Falstad, Muradin, and Velen. Then Anduin would reveal the second reason why he had come to Ironforge. As they made their leisurely way toward their destination, human and dwarf guards following at a discreet yet expedient distance, Anduin indulged himself in nostalgia. Heat buffeted him as they passed the Great Forge that gave the ancient city its name. The distinctive smell of molten metal transported him back to his last visit a few years earlier. "It's been too long since I've been here," he said to Moira. Moira's green eyes were on her son as she replied, "Aye, it has. The years go by faster than we think." Regarding the boy who was clearly struggling not to race ahead of his mother and the human king, Anduin said to Moira, "It was good of the Three Hammers to come to Stormwind to honor my father. Especially given the fact that the last time I was here, he tried to kill you." Moira chuckled. "Oh, lad, you know he and I made our peace over that long ago. By the time we lost him, we'd come to admire and respect each other. Your father was angry at me for keeping you here. He was worried for your safety. As Dagran's grown, impossible as it seems, that boy has become more precious to me by the day. Big as Varian Wrynn was, I'd have torn him apart with my bare hands had he kidnapped my wee one." A fierce expression flickered across her face. "I believe you," Anduin said, and he did. "Dwarves are fighters, that's for sure." "He was proud of you," Moira said quietly. "Even when he didn't understand you. Don't think he only loved you in the later years, Your Majesty." "I don't. I knew. And please," Anduin said, "just call me Anduin. I'm more used to friendship than formality here. When I came to visit,
your father asked me to call him Uncle Magni, and Aerin called me 'li'l lion.' " "Aerin?" "A young woman who was the first female in your father's guard. You'd have liked her. She was trying to improve my abilities with sword and shield before she died at Kharanos." "Ah," Moira said, regarding him speculatively. "Lost your first friend, did you? I'm sorry." She brightened a little. "But at least from what I hear, her teaching wasn't wasted. You're not the warrior your father was, but there's no shame in that, and I understand your swordsmanship isn't half bad these days." He gave her a wry smile. "Surprising everyone, no doubt." "Well, maybe just a wee bit." Anduin chuckled. "I'm definitely not the warrior Father was. Never will be. No one will." I can't be the hero you were, he had said, kneeling where his father had died. I can't be the king you were. He turned to her, deciding to confide in her. "But I will tell you something. Before I met Aerin, I hated heavy weapons training. I avoided it as much as possible, and I became extremely creative with my excuses. But after she died, I began training in earnest. I didn't shirk it anymore. I wanted to become, if not a superior swordsman, a good one at least. The Light has blessed me with other gifts. I trust in it to aid me even if I have no weapon in my hand at all. Aerin promised to 'dwarf-temper' me, and she did." Moira laughed out loud at that. "That's as good a term as I've ever heard! Dwarf-tempered, eh? Well. You're a fine specimen, Anduin Wrynn, and I'm proud my people have contributed to the man you've grown up to be." "Thank you. I'm honored to have such a strong personal friendship with the dwarves-all of them." He hesitated. "You all do seem to be getting along." "We're dwarves," she said, shrugging. "Words fly. Sometimes so do beer steins. Although I'm thinking that the latter will happen less often when they're full. We're most grateful for your gift."
"I could tell." When Anduin had made his formal entrance to Ironforge a few hours earlier, he'd been greeted by the Three Hammers and an honor guard. They'd made him welcome in this, his first visit as a ruling king. And he knew that welcome was genuine. But when the ten wagons bearing Stormwind's gift rolled up and the protective covering was whisked off the first one, thunderous applause and cheers rang out. The gift, of course, was barley, the key ingredient in what was arguably Ironforge's best-loved export. "Think of it as Stormwind's contribution to peace and goodwill in Ironforge," Anduin said. "Once you're done with your travels, hurry back and we'll toast you with the first batch," Moira promised. "I've heard the brewmasters are going to call it Anduin's Amber Ale." That got a full-fledged laugh out of him. She joined in. "I can't remember the last time I laughed like that," he said. "It feels...good." "Aye, it does. To answer your question before we got sidetracked on the extremely important topic of beer, the Hammers have been able to work through things, yes." "And...how is your father?" "Well," she said, "he's diamond, now, and Light knows where he is from day to day. Would you like to see where he was?" "Yes. I would." Dagran paused. Up ahead, Anduin could glimpse the shape of the familiar winged skeleton through the archways that marked the Hall of Explorers. The boy looked longingly at it and said, "As long as you promise we come back t' the pteradon!"
-
Magni had become one with the earth in Old Ironforge, a chamber deep below the High Seat. The three descended, and Anduin could almost feel the press of tons of stone and earth above him. The dwarves, of course, had no such unease as their path took them deeper
still. Anduin knew that the dais where Magni had been turned to diamond would be empty. He knew. Even so, actually seeing it was a shock. He had been present on that day when King Magni Bronzebeard had performed the ancient ritual. Now he stood, wordless, as Dagran ascended the steps nimbly before his mother and the visiting ruler, bypassing translucent blue-tinted chunks that once had formed the diamond encasement of the diamond king. The boy went straight for a scroll that had been safely mounted behind glass and began to read aloud. The hairs at the back of Anduin's neck prickled as he heard again the words that had been spoken by Advisor Belgrum, now uttered in the treble tones of Magni's grandchild. " 'And here are the why and th' how, to again become one wi' the mountain. For behold, we are earthen, o' the land, an' its soul is ours, its pain is ours, its heartbeat is ours. We sing its song an' weep for its beauty. For who would not wish t' return home? That is the why, O children o' the earth.' " Dagran looked up. "Should I keep going?" "No, sweet boy," Moira said. Anduin bent and picked up one of the shards. "It was a terrible thing to behold," he said quietly, turning over the diamond chunk in his hands. "It happened so quickly and so completely. I thought he was dead." "And why would you not?" Moira said. "Even we dwarves thought so." "That had to have been a tremendous shock when he awoke." "That phrase," Moira said, "does not begin to capture it. All I can say is it's a good thing dwarven hearts are almost as strong as stone." Anduin hesitated. "I'm so glad. Not just for me and my friendship with him but for you. There was a time I thought my father and I would never become a real family, but we did." Moira was quiet for a while. Her bright, bookish son was busying himself with another ancient tome, his green eyes flicking over ancient words. When she spoke, she pitched her voice low.
"It's for that child that I'd want that more than for myself," she said. "It's...a lot to undo, Anduin. But he said he wanted to try." "Will you?" Anduin asked, speaking quietly so the boy could not hear. "I think my people and my son would be best served by having good relationships with a being who speaks directly to Azeroth." It was an attempt at lightness, but it fell flat. "But what about you?" Again Moira was silent. She had just opened her mouth to speak when a voice interrupted her. "Yer Highness, Yer Majesty, come quickly!" It was one of the guards usually stationed at the High Seat. He was flushed and out of breath. "What is it?" Moira demanded. "It's yer father! He's here! And he needs tae see you two right away!"
Magni Bronzebeard awaited them in the Hall of Explorers. Anduin, who once had looked on, helpless to intervene, as the king was agonizingly transformed into gleaming stone, had thought he would be prepared to meet the awakened Magni. He was not. Magni stood beneath the pteradon skeleton with his back to the entrance, deep in conversation with Velen and High Explorer Muninn Magellas. Falstad and Muradin stood beside them, listening intently, their bushy eyebrows drawn together in concern. High Tinker Gelbin Mekkatorque, the white-bearded leader of the gnomes whose cheerful demeanor belied his deep, quiet wisdom, also had been summoned. Anduin had scheduled a meeting with him for the next day. The gnomes had been invaluable against the Legion, and he wanted to make sure he had a chance to thank the physically smallest but perhaps intellectually greatest members of the Alliance. The presence of the high tinker's adviser, the gruff warrior Captain Tread Sparknozzle, whose black eye patch was testimony to his years of battlefield experience, indicated that this was no mere diplomatic
visit on Magni's part. When the glittering shape turned to Anduin, the young king felt as if he had been punched in the gut. A thing made of stone should not move so gracefully, nor should its diamond beard flutter with that movement. Magni was neither the dwarf he had been nor the statue he had become; he was both and neither, and the juxtaposition struck Anduin on a profound level. A heartbeat later, though, gratitude and joy flooded him at Magni's words. "Anduin! My, ye've grown!" The phrase loathed by children everywhere was transformed by the power of nostalgia and the inexorable arrival of adulthood. It was so ordinary a phrase, so real, that the illusion of "other" was as shattered as Magni's diamond prison had been. The voice was warm, living, and very definitely Magni's. Anduin wondered whether the diamond "flesh" would be warm, too, if he were to touch the being who now strode toward him. But the spurs and shards that dotted the dwarfshaped form precluded the enthusiastic handshakes and crushing hugs that Magni had been so prone to in his former incarnation. Had Moira or Dagran found a way around that? Did Magni even wish to bestow the gestures he'd been so free with during his life as a being of flesh and blood? For the sake of all of them, Anduin hoped so. Moira had asked Belgrum to take care of Dagran, who had protested that he wanted to meet his grandfather. We'll see, she said. Her face wasn't hard exactly, but it was concerned. "Magni," Anduin said. "It is so good to see you." "And ye and me daughter." Magni turned his stone eyes to Moira. "I dare tae hope that once me duty's done here, I might be able tae meet me grandson. But sadly, a visit's nae what I've come about." Of course not. Magni spoke for Azeroth now, and that was a great and solemn duty. Anduin's gaze flickered to the draenei. Velen was not a maudlin soul. He smiled easily and warmly and often laughed. But he had known so much pain that it was those lines his ancient face remembered, cutting through his visage as if they had been chiseled, and they were set in a grim expression now.
Magni regarded Moira, Anduin, and Velen seriously. "I've sought the three o' ye out nae because all o' ye are leaders o' yer people but because ye are priests." Moira and Anduin exchanged surprised glances. Anduin was aware of this commonality, of course, but for some reason he hadn't given much thought to it. "She's in terrible pain," he said, his diamond face, seemingly so hard, furrowing easily into an empathetic wince. Anduin wondered if the rite that had so transformed Magni meant that he could now literally sense Azeroth's pain. Anduin thought of the destruction of Silithus, of the almost inconceivable size of the sword now towering over the landscape. If Sargeras's last attempt to destroy Azeroth had come close to succeeding, it was a terrifying thought. "She needs healin'. An' that's what priests do. She made it clear that all must heal her or all will perish." Velen and Moira turned to each other. "I believe that the words your father has spoken are true," the draenei said. "If we do not tend to our wounded world-as many of us as possible-then most assuredly we all will perish. There are others who must hear this message." "Aye," Moira said, "and I think it's time that the lad met the rest of us." And as one, the two turned to look directly at Anduin. Anduin's brow furrowed in confusion. "The rest of whom?" "Other priests," Moira said. "The Prophet and I have been working with a group you're long overdue to get to know." And then Anduin understood. "The Conclave. In the Netherlight Temple." The very name seemed to set calm upon Anduin's soul, almost in defiance of the temple's history as the prison for Saraka, a void lord and a fallen naaru, and its location in the heart of the Twisting Nether. For eons, the draenei had studied the creature. Only recently had they been able to purify it. Now, as its true self, Saa'ra, the naaru lingered, embracing its former prison as a sanctuary it offered to others. Anduin had heard about the struggle that had unfolded in the early
days of the Legion's invasion. And he knew that many who now walked its hallowed halls were, like the naaru itself, those who had fallen into darkness but had been brought back into the Light. These priests, known as the Conclave, had reached out to others on Azeroth so they would join together to help stand against the onslaught of the Legion. Although the threat had ended, the Conclave still existed, offering help and compassion to all who would seek the Light. "What the Conclave did and continues to do is so important," Anduin said. During the war, they had roamed Azeroth, recruiting priests to tend to those who were on the front lines against the Legion. Now they still tended to those courageous fighters as they dealt with lasting injuries to body, mind, and spirit. Not all scars were physical. "I wish I could have assisted their efforts during the war." "Dear boy," Velen said, "you have always been right where you needed to be. We have our own paths, our own struggles. My son's fate was mine. Moira's path is overcoming prejudice and championing the Dark Irons who believe in her. Yours was succeeding a great king and governing the people who have loved you since your birth. It is time to let go of regrets. There is no place for them in the Netherlight Temple. It is a site filled with only hope and determination to follow where the Light leads us and bring it into the dark places that so need its blessing." "The Prophet, as he usually is, is dead right," Moira said. "Though I admit I'm pleased to finally be able to share this place with you. Despite the dire nature behind this visit now, I know you'll find some balm for your soul there. It's impossible not to." She spoke as one who herself had found such a balm. Anduin thought of the strange material safely inside his pocket. He had planned to show it to the Three Hammers after what was supposed to have been a pleasant walk. Now he realized that no one would be better able to identify the stone than Magni, who was still one with the earth. "We will go, but not yet. I thank you for your message, Magni. And... there's something I need to show you. All of you." Briefly he summarized what he knew about the amber material, realizing as he
spoke that it was precious little. "We don't know much," he finished, "but I believe you can tell us more." He withdrew the handkerchief and folded it open. The little gem glowed its warm amber and blue hues. Magni's eyes filled with diamond tears. "Azerite," he breathed. Azerite. They had a name for it at last. "What is it?" Moira asked. "Och," Magni said softly, sadly, "I told ye she was hurtin'. Now ye can see it fer yerselves. This...is part o' her. It's...bah, 'tis so hard tae describe in words. Her essence, I suppose will do. More an' more o' it is comin' tae th' surface." "Can she not heal herself?" Mekkatorque wanted to know. "Aye, she can and has," Magni replied. "Ye've nae forgotten th' Cataclysm, have ye? But that fel thing that bastard stuck her wi'..." He shook his head, looking like someone who was losing his beloved. Anduin supposed he was. " 'Tis a good an' noble effort she's made, but one that's destined tae fail. Azeroth canna do it by hersel'. Nae this time. That's why she's beggin' fer our help!" It all made sense. Perfect, devastating sense. Anduin passed the small sample of Azerite to Moira. As all did, she went wide-eyed with wonder at what she was feeling. "We hear you," he said to Magni, looking deep into the diamond eyes. "We will do all we can. But we also need to make sure that this... Azerite...isn't used by the Horde." The Azerite pebble now rested in Muradin's hands. He glowered. "Enough o' this and ye could take down a whole city." "Enough o' this," Falstad said, "an' we could shatter th' Horde." "We're not at war," Anduin said. "For now, our task is twofold-and it's clear. We need to heal Azeroth, and we need to keep this"-and he accepted the Azerite-"safely away from the Horde." He regarded Mekkatorque. "If anyone can figure out how to put this...this essence to good use for a worthy purpose, it's your people.
Magni has told us that Azeroth is producing increasing amounts of this substance. We will send you samples when we have obtained them." Gelbin nodded. "I'll get my best minds on it. I think I know just the person." "An' I'll talk tae the other members of th' Explorers' League an' send a team down tae Silithus," Magellas said. "All that's grand," Magni said even as he shook his head in sorrow. To Anduin he said, "Aye, I ken that all this was a shocker tae ye, lad. Off wi' ye three. Go tae yer priest hall an' let them know a whole world might be dyin'." He cleared his throat and straightened. "Right, then. Me job's done. I'll be off." "Father," Moira said. "If you aren't called away by...by her...then I'd ask you to stay for a bit." She took a deep breath. "There's a wee lad who's been pestering me about meeting you for some time now."
THE NETHERLIGHT TEMPLE Anduin stepped through a portal into a realm of wonder so beautiful, so Light-filled, his heart seemed to break even as it swelled with joy. He had spent much time in the Exodar and was accustomed to the soothing purple light and the sense of peace that pervaded the place. But this...this had the Exodar's essence writ large, but with a different touch. The massive carved statues of draenei should have been intimidating, towering over visitors as they did. Instead, they felt like protective benevolent presences. The melodic sound of flowing water came from both sides of the ramp that Anduin descended; sparks of light floated up gently, as if created by the soft splashing. He took a deep breath of the clean, sweet air as if he'd never truly expanded his lungs before. Farther into the temple, down the long, gentle incline, was a cluster of people. He knew who they were or, rather, what they represented, and the knowledge filled him with quiet anticipatory joy. Velen laid a hand on the king's shoulder as he had done so many times over the last years and smiled. "Yes," he affirmed, seeing Anduin's unspoken question. "They are all here." "When you said priests," Anduin said, "I assumed you meant..." "Priests just like us," Moira finished. She gestured to the various individuals milling around them. Among their number Anduin saw not only humans, gnomes, dwarves, draenei, and worgen-those who would be at home in Stormwind's Cathedral of Light-but also night elves, who worshipped their moon goddess, Elune; tauren, who followed their sun god, An'she; and... "Forsaken," he whispered as the hair along his arms and the back of his neck lifted. One of them stood, her stooped back toward him, cheerfully talking
with a draenei and a dwarf. There was another group heading toward one of the hall's alcoves, carefully bearing piles of no doubt ancient tomes. This one consisted of a Forsaken, a night elf, and a worgen. Words would not come. Anduin found himself staring openly, hardly daring to blink lest it all turn out to be a dream. In Azeroth, these groups would be killing one another-or, at the very least, they would be suspicious, hate-filled, and fearful. The musical sound of a night elf's throaty laugh wafted to him. Velen looked completely content, but Moira was eyeing him carefully. "You all right, Anduin?" He nodded. "Yes," he said, his voice husky. "I can honestly say I've never felt better. This...all this...." He shook his head, smiling. "It's what I've dreamed of seeing all my life." "We are priests before all else," came a voice. It was masculine, warm, and jovial, though it had a peculiar timbre to it, and as Anduin turned, he fully expected to greet a human priest of the Light. He found himself face-to-face with a Forsaken. Anduin, schooled since childhood not to let his emotions show, hoped he recovered sufficiently, but inwardly he was reeling. "So it seems," he said, his voice betraying his astonishment despite himself. "And I am glad for it." "Your Majesty," said Velen, "may I present Archbishop Alonsus Faol." The Forsaken's eyes glowed an eerie yellow. They couldn't possibly twinkle with amusement as a living man's would, but somehow they did. "Don't fret about not recognizing me," the archbishop said. "I know I don't look like my portrait." He lifted a bony hand and stroked his chin. "I've lost the beard, you see. Slimmed down quite a bit, too." Oh, yes, those undead eyes were twinkling. Anduin gave up any hope of behaving in a typically regal manner here. We are priests before all else, the undead being had told him, and he discovered it was a relief to put away the burden of royalty at least temporarily. He smiled and bowed.
"You are a man out of history, sir," Anduin told the archbishop in a voice of awe. "You founded the paladin order-the Silver Hand. Uther Lightbringer was your first apprentice. And Stormwind might not be standing today were it not for your diligent efforts. To say it is an honor to meet you doesn't begin to describe it. You were...you are one of my heroes." Anduin was utterly sincere. He'd pored through all the thick tomes about the benevolent, Greatfather Winter-like priest. The words on those pages painted a picture of a man who was quick to laugh but stood as strong as stone. Historians, usually content with simply recording dry facts, had waxed eloquent about Faol's warmth and kindliness. Portraits depicted him as a short, stout man with a bushy white beard. The undead being who stood before the king of Stormwind was still shorter than average but otherwise unrecognizable. The beard was gone. Cut? Rotted away? And the hair was dark with dried blood and ichor. He smelled like old vellum: dusty but not unpleasant. Faol had died when Anduin was a child, and the boy had never gotten to meet him. Faol sighed. "I have done and been those things you have cited, true. I have also been a mindless minion of the Scourge." He lifted his bony arms, indicating the glorious temple and those who tended it. "But here the only thing that matters is that I am a priest first." "I've been working with the archbishop for some time now," Moira said. "He's been helping me and the Dark Irons find and gather priests for the temple. We needed to do that in order to stand against the Legion, but even now that the crisis has passed, I still keep coming here. The archbishop's fine company. Considering he is, after all...you know." She paused. "A man with no beard." Anduin chuckled. He felt a familiar, welcome warmth in his chest as he looked around, trying to be more evaluating in his assessment of the place. Could this be a template for the future? Surely if gnome and tauren, human and blood elf, Forsaken and dwarf, could bond together for the common good, this could be re-created on a larger scale on Azeroth. The problem was that the priests, at least, had a common point they
all agreed on even if each saw the Light through a different lens, as it were. "There is another notable person I think you'd like to meet," Faol said to Anduin. "She, too, is from Lordaeron. But do not fear; she yet breathes, though she faced many dangers with courage and the Light's aid. Come here, my dear." His voice grew fond as he beckoned to a smiling blond woman. She stepped forward, taking the archbishop's desiccated hand without hesitation, then turned to regard Anduin. "Hello, Your Majesty," she said. She was, he guessed, a little bit older than Jaina, tall and slender with long golden hair and arresting blue-green eyes. She looked familiar somehow, though Anduin knew he had never met her before. "Please let me offer my condolences on the death of your father. Stormwind and the Alliance lost a truly great man. Your family has always been so kind to mine, and I regret that I wasn't able to pay my respects." "Thank you," Anduin said. He was trying and failing to place her. "You'll have to pardon me, but...have we met?" The woman smiled a little sadly. "No, we've not," she said, "but you've probably seen a family resemblance in some portraits. You see...I'm Calia Menethil. Arthas was my brother."
Calia Menethil. Hers was another name straight out of the history books. Calia, like the archbishop, had been thought lost. The older sister of the ill-fated Arthas Menethil, she was believed to have perished on the day when the heir to Lordaeron, who was by then a servant of the terrifying Lich King, had marched into the throne room, murdered his father in cold blood, and unleashed the undead Scourge upon the city. But his sister had survived, and she was here in the Netherlight Temple. The Light had found her. Moved in a way he couldn't quite describe, Anduin closed the distance between him and Calia in three quick, long-legged strides and extended his hand mutely. Calia hesitated, then took it. Anduin squeezed her hand and smiled. "I am gladder than I can say to find you still alive, my lady. After so long with no word, we assumed the worst." "Thank you. There were moments, I assure you, when I thought the worst was upon me." "What happened?" "It is...a long story," she said, clearly unwilling to share it.
"And we have no time for a long tale this day." It was Velen. Anduin was filled with questions for both the archbishop and the queen of Lordaeron, for such, now, she was. But Velen was completely right. Despite the pleasant shocks he'd received in the last few moments, Anduin, Moira, and Velen were here with a grim purpose. He smiled at Calia and, releasing her hand, turned to regard the assembled priests. There were so many. As if reading his mind, Faol said, "It seems like a lot of us, doesn't it? But this is only a handful compared to the numbers we could have. There is plenty of room for all of us." Anduin couldn't even wrap his mind around it. "What an amazing thing you've achieved here," he said to Faol. "All of you. I knew you were working toward this, but to truly see it with my own eyes is something else again. I wish this were nothing more than a visit to a place I've longed to behold, but we have received some dire news." He nodded to Moira. She was the daughter of Magni, "the Speaker," who had brought the warning to them. She was also well known and well regarded here, whereas he was a newcomer-a king, to be sure, but in a place where that was not seen as the highest authority. The dwarf queen squared her shoulders and addressed the group. "We're servants of the Light, but we live on Azeroth," she said. "And my father has now become the Speaker for our world. He came to Ironforge, where the Prophet and the king of Stormwind were visiting, with terrible news." Her blunt, steady speech faltered slightly. And for a moment Anduin saw in her the face of the girl she had once been, lost and uncertain. She recovered quickly, though, and continued. "Lads, lasses...our world's hurt badly. She's in trouble. In horrible pain. My father told us that she needs healing; she can't do it by herself." Soft gasps rippled through the assembled crowd of priests. "It is that monstrous sword!" a tauren rumbled, his deep voice reminding Anduin sharply of Baine Bloodhoof, the tauren high chieftain-and his friend.
"How can we possibly heal the world itself?" a draenei said, a note of despair making her melodious voice crack. It was a valid question. How indeed? Priests healed, but their patients were flesh. They mended wounds, cured illnesses and curses, and sometimes, if the Light willed, brought the dead back to life. What could they do with a wound to the world? He knew where they could start. He could feel the answer inside his coat, next to his heart, where he had placed the small, precious piece of Azerite. For a moment he hesitated, looking at the Forsaken, troll, and tauren faces turned toward them. Horde faces. Could they be trusted? He asked the question of the Light-and his own body. Anduin had been gravely injured when Garrosh Hellscream had caused an enormous artifact known as the Divine Bell to come crashing down upon him in Pandaria. Since that moment, his bones ached whenever he was on the wrong path-when he was being cruel, or thoughtless, or courting danger. There was no ache in his body now. Indeed, he felt better than he had in a long time. Was it the Netherlight Temple or the piece of Azerite that placed this calm upon him? He did not know. But he knew that both were benevolent influences. Besides, Azeroth herself had asked for their aid. Anduin stepped forward, lifting his hands for silence as the crowd began to grow increasingly anxious. "Brothers and sisters, listen to me, please!" They quieted, their oh so different faces turned to him with exquisite, beautifully similar expressions of concern and a desire to help. And so he trusted them, these priests whose people owed allegiance to the Horde. He let them hold the Azerite, watching their reactions. "Magni was once a dwarf, the father of a priestess," Anduin said as each of them held the small item. "It makes sense that he would turn first to our order. I feel certain that there is something we ourselves can do at some point, but first we'll need to do research. Ask questions.
And in the meantime, we need to reach out to other types of healers. Shaman. Druids. Those who have closer ties to the earth and its living things than we do." Anduin paused, looking around at the great hall. He wondered what the druidic equivalent looked like, or the shamanic. No doubt beautiful and perfectly right for them, as this temple was for the Conclave. "I will be traveling to Teldrassil myself very shortly." He corrected himself. "No. Not shortly-on the morrow." He wished he had been able to spend more time in Ironforge. He had wanted to meet with Mekkatorque and his people and thank them for their contribution of gnomish brains and gnomish technology that had helped turn back an enemy so dire that there had been true doubt they would ever succeed. But events had overtaken them all. Mekkatorque would understand. "You have been out in the world, finding your fellow priests," the king of Stormwind continued. "Now we need to broaden that outstretched hand of aid. We need to extend it to those who have a better chance of helping right away. This will not be easy. So I would ask the Horde and Alliance members present to seek out the druids and shaman on their own sides." They began nodding, calmer now, and Anduin realized what he had just done. He had come, an invited guest, into this hall and had assumed he had the right to instruct members of the Conclave on their next actions. Chagrined, he turned to Faol. "My apologies, Archbishop. These are your people." "They are people who serve the Light," the undead priest reminded him. "As are you." His head cocked to one side, and he smiled slightly. "You remind me of Calia's brother when he was younger, when he still followed the Light. You have a gift for ruling, my young friend. People will follow where you lead them." Anduin understood that the comparison was meant as a compliment. He had heard it before, most memorably from Garrosh Hellscream. While the former warchief of the Horde had been imprisoned below
the Temple of the White Tiger during his trial, he had asked for Anduin to visit him. Garrosh had brought up the specter of the man who had become the Lich King. There was another golden-haired, beloved human prince once. He was a paladin, and yet he turned his back on the Light. Not an unexpected comparison at all, given their outward similarities, yet it was an uncomfortable one. Anduin found he glanced at Calia, who was smiling in agreement, nostalgia sharpening the premature lines on her face. Not even Jaina could smile when thinking of Arthas. No one could except the few left who remembered Arthas Menethil as an innocent child. "Thank you," Anduin told Faol. "But I shan't insert myself again unless invited to do so. I respect the Conclave and its leadership." Faol shrugged. A tiny piece of mummified skin fell off and wafted to the floor at the gesture. It should have been repellent, but Anduin found himself regarding it in much the same way as he would a feather falling from a trimmed cape. He was learning to see the person, not the body. In a way, we are all trapped in a shell, he thought. Theirs is just held together differently. "All voices are listened to here," Faol said. "Even the youngest acolyte may have something useful to say. Your voice is welcome here too, King Anduin Wrynn. As is your presence." "I would like to return soon," Anduin said. He looked at Calia and Faol. "There is much I see here that I think I can learn from." And much, he thought but did not say, I need to learn about. An idea was beginning to form, daring and audacious and unexpected. He would have to speak with Shaw. Faol chuckled, a raspy but not unpleasant sound. "Admitting you do not know something is the beginning of wisdom. Of course. Any time... priest." He inclined his head. Anduin looked at Moira and Velen. "I must return to Stormwind shortly and prepare for my trip. It has a fresh urgency." He handed Moira the Azerite sample. "Would you please
deliver this to Mekkatorque for me? Tell him I'm sorry I can't deliver it in person." "Aye," Moira said. "I'll share anything he learns, of course. My father will no doubt have some suggestions for us as well." "I'm certain he will," Anduin said. The import of the task settled again upon his heart and mind, chasing away the peace of this place and his curiosity about Calia...and about the Forsaken.
When he was feeling restless, Kalecgos, the former blue Dragon Aspect and present member of the Kirin Tor's Council of Six, liked to walk through the streets of his adopted city. He addressed, reliably and responsibly, the concerns and troubles for the daylight hours- when he needed to be present to help tackle a thorny problem or suggest ancient methods that the current council might not have investigated. In the evenings, though, his concerns and troubles were his own. Dragons often took on the forms of members of the younger races. Alexstrasza the Life-Binder appeared as a high elf. Chronormu, one of the most important of the time-warding bronze dragons, favored the guise of a gnome known as "Chromie." Kalecgos had long ago settled upon the face and body of a half-human, half-elf male. He'd never been sure why. Certainly not because it allowed him to pass unnoticed: there weren't a lot of half-elves running around. He had decided that the form appealed to him because it represented a melding of two worlds. Because he, "Kalec," also felt that he was a blend of two worlds: that of dragon and that of human.
Kalec had always felt drawn to and protective of the younger races. Like the great red dragon Korialstrasz, who had given his life to save others, he liked humans. And unlike Korialstrasz, who until his last breath had been loyal only to his adored Alexstrasza, Kalec had loved humans. Two, in fact. Two strong, kind, and brave women. Loved and lost them both. Anveena Teague-who in the end realized she was not a true human at all-had sacrificed herself so that a monstrous, devastatingly powerful demon would be denied entry into Azeroth. And Lady Jaina Proudmoore-she was gone, too, sinking ever deeper into a dark pit of pain and hatred that he feared would consume her. She used to join him on these rambles. They would walk together, hand in hand, often to pause and watch Windle Sparkshine light Dalaran's lamps at nine o'clock sharp. Windle's daughter, Kinndy, had been Jaina's apprentice and was one of the many casualties of Garrosh Hellscream's attack. No, Kalec thought, call it what it was: destruction of Theramore. Windle had gotten permission to nightly create a memorial to his little girl; her image, drawn in magical golden light, appeared when Windle used his wand to light each lamp. But Jaina had left, wrapped in anger and frustration as if in a cloak. Left the organization of magi known as the Kirin Tor and her position as its leader; left him, too, with only a few angry words spoken between them. She had been pushed farther than she could bear, and now she was gone. Kalec could have followed her, could have forced her to confront him, demanded an explanation as to why she had left so abruptly. But he didn't. He loved her, and he respected her. And although every day that passed made it less and less likely that she would return, he still held out hope. In the meantime, he had been appointed to fill the vacancy left by Jaina's exodus, and the Kirin Tor had been busy indeed during the war against the Legion. He had a purpose. He had friends. He was making his way in the world. He had thought about visiting his good friend, Kirygosa, who had quietly taken up residence in Stranglethorn. After a life spent in a part
of the world that knew mostly winter, Kiry was enjoying a permanent summer. It might be nice to join her for a while. But somehow he never did. If Jaina was ever to seek him out, it would be here. And so he stayed. Tonight, his feet brought him to the statue of one of Dalaran's greatest magi, Antonidas, who had been Jaina's tutor. It had been she who had commissioned the statue, which hovered a few feet off the green grass thanks to a spell. And it had been she who had written the inscription:
ARCHMAGE ANTONIDAS, GRAND MAGUS OF THE KIRIN TOR THE GREAT CITY OF DALARAN STANDS ONCE AGAIN- A TESTAMENT TO THE TENACITY AND WILL OF ITS GREATEST SON. YOUR SACRIFICES WILL NOT HAVE BEEN IN VAIN, DEAREST FRIEND. WITH LOVE AND HONOR, JAINA PROUDMOORE
It was here that he and Jaina once had a terrible argument. Devastated by the brutal obliteration of her city, Jaina had desired vengeance. When the Kirin Tor would not help her strike against the Horde, she had turned to him. Her words, first pleading, then scathing in their hurt-fueled anger, lingered with him still. You once said you would fight for me-for the lady of Theramore. Theramore's gone. But I'm still here. Help me. Please. We have to destroy the Horde. He had refused her. This implacable...well, hatred-it's not you. You're wrong. This is me. This is who the Horde made me. In so many ways, Jaina was as much a casualty of Theramore as Kinndy was. It had been the Kirin Tor's decision to again allow members of the Horde among their number. Azeroth was too vulnerable to the Legion to turn down aid out of fear and hatred. Kalec had wanted to speak with Jaina, but she had disappeared without a word. And then-his skin prickled, and a sudden knowing filled his brain.
Lady Jaina Proudmoore had returned to Dalaran. He sensed her, and she was right- "I thought I might find you here," came a soft voice behind him. His heart leaping, Kalec swung around. She was every bit as beautiful as he remembered as she slipped off the hood of her cloak. Moonlight shone upon her white hair with its single golden streak, and it looked like she was crowned with luminous silver. She wore it differently, in a braid this time. Her face was pale, her eyes pools of shadow. "Jaina," Kalec breathed. "I-I'm so glad you're all right. It's so good to see you." "Rumor has it you're now a member of the council." She was smiling as she said it. "Congratulations." "Rumor is correct, and thank you," Kalec replied. "Though I'd vacate it more than happily...if you are back to stay." The smile faded, turned sad. "No." He nodded. It was what he had feared, and his heart hurt, but it would do no good to say that. She knew. "Where will you go?" he said instead. The light was bright enough to catch the little furrow between her brows that was so uniquely hers. It affected Kalec even more than the smile had. "I don't know, actually. But I don't belong here anymore." Her voice sharpened slightly with anger. "I can't agree with what-" She caught herself and took a deep breath. "Well. I don't agree." This is who the Horde made me. They gazed at each other for a long moment. Then, to Kalec's surprise, Jaina stepped forward and took his hands in hers. The touch, so sweetly familiar, moved him even more than he expected it to. "You were right about something. I wanted you to know that." "What?" he asked, trying to keep his voice steady. "About how dangerous, how damaging, hate is. I don't like what it's done to me, but I don't know that I can change it now. I know what I'm
against. I know what angers me. What I hate. What I don't want. But I don't know what calms me, or what I love, or what I do want." Her voice was pitched softly, but it trembled with emotion. Kalec gripped her hands tightly. "Everything I've felt or done since Theramore has been a reaction against something. I feel...I feel like I'm in a pit and every time I try to climb out of it, I just tumble back down." "I know," Kalec said gently. Her hands were so warm in his. He didn't want to ever let go. "I've watched you struggle so hard for so long. And I couldn't help." "No one could," Jaina said. "This is something I have to do for myself." He looked down, running his thumb over her fingers. "I know that, too." "I'm not leaving because of the vote." Kalec, surprised, glanced up sharply at that. "You're not?" "No. Not this time. People must be true to their own natures, as must I." She laughed softly, self-deprecatingly. "I just...have to figure out what that is." "You will. And I believe it won't be anything ugly or cruel." She eyed him. "I'm not sure I believe that." "I do. And...I admire you. For having the courage to face this." "I knew you'd understand. You always have." "Peace is a noble goal for the world," Kalec said, "but it is also a noble goal for oneself." He realized he was smiling despite the ache in his human-shaped chest. "You'll find your way, Jaina Proudmoore. I have faith in you." She said wryly, "You may be the only person in the world who does." He lifted her hands and pressed a kiss on each of them. "Travel safely, my lady. And never forget: if you have need of me, I will be there." She looked up at him for a moment, stepping closer. Now he could see her eyes catching the moonlight. He had missed her. Would miss
her. He had a terrible feeling they wouldn't see each other again, and he hoped he was wrong. Jaina let go of his hands, but only to bring hers up to cup his face. She stood on her toes as he bent. Their lips met-so familiar, so sweet, in a kiss so tender that it shook Kalec to his core. Jaina... He wanted to kiss her forever. But all too soon, that precious warmth pulled back. He swallowed hard. "Good-bye, Kalec," she whispered, and now he saw tears glistening in her eyes. "Farewell, Jaina. I hope you find what you seek." She gave him a tremulous smile, then retreated a few paces. Magic swirled as she conjured a portal. She stepped into it and was gone. Farewell, beloved. Kalec stood for a long time, his only company the statue of the great archmage.
The Ironforge trip had been cut short, and Wyll had been running himself ragged trying to get everything together in time for the next leg of Anduin's journey. Anduin had, after much effort, managed to persuade Wyll to stay in Stormwind and have some well-deserved rest. Once Wyll had retired, Anduin reached for the candelabra on the dressing table. He lit one of its three candles and placed it in the window before heading to the dining room for a very late supper. Tonight, as on certain previous occasions, the candelabra had a purpose other than providing illumination. As Anduin eyed the roasted chicken, vegetables, and crisp Dalaran apples he had no appetite. The news from Shaw and Magni was too unsettling. He would have left for Teldrassil immediately, but it had taken this long to get everything prepared. First light couldn't come soon enough for him. "Eat something," came a gruff voice. "Even priests and kings need to eat." Anduin clapped a hand to his forehead. "Genn," he said, "I'm so sorry. Please, join me. We still have things to settle before I leave,
don't we?" "First thing is food," Greymane said, and he pulled up a chair and speared some chicken. "You and Wyll are colluding against me," Anduin sighed. "The sad thing is, I'm glad of it." Genn grunted in amusement as Anduin filled his own plate. "I've got the papers drawn up," Genn said. "Thank you for handling that. I'll sign them right away." "Read them first. Doesn't matter who wrote it. There's a free piece of advice for you." Anduin smiled tiredly. "You've given me quite a bit of free advice." "And some you're even grateful for, I imagine," Genn said. "All of it. Even what I disagree with and choose to ignore." "Ah, now there speaks a wise king." Greymane reached for the bottle of wine on the table and filled his glass. "No coup planned, then?" Anduin found himself reaching for another helping of chicken. His body was hungry, it would seem, even if his mind was distracted. "Not this visit." "That's good. Save your plotting efforts for another time." "There is one thing I'd like to discuss before you depart," Greymane said, turning serious. There was something in his body language that alerted Anduin, who put down his knife and fork and regarded the other king. "Of course," Anduin said, concerned. Now that he had the full attention of the king of Stormwind, Genn looked a bit uncomfortable. He took a drink of the wine, then faced Anduin squarely. "You honor me with your trust," he said. "And I'll do everything I can to govern your people with care and diligence if, Light forbid, something should happen to you." "I know you will," Anduin assured him. "But I'm an old man. I won't be around forever."
Anduin sighed. He knew where this was heading. "It's been a long and challenging day. I'm too tired to have this discussion with you." "You've always been too something or other every time I've brought it up," Genn pointed out. Anduin knew it was true. He toyed with his food. "We're on the eve of your departure to visit several different lands," Greymane continued. "Fresh dangers are cropping up. When will be a good time? Because I don't relish the thought of trying to sort through gaggles of nobility each pushing their best claim forward." The image made Anduin smile in spite of himself, but it faded at Genn's next words. "This isn't a game. If the wrong person is given the kingdom, Stormwind could find itself looking at a very dire situation indeed. Your mother was a horrible casualty of an angry mob furious at what the nobility was doing to the people. And you are old enough to remember how unstable things were when your father went missing." Anduin was. He'd been the nominal king during his father's disappearance, but he'd had Bolvar Fordragon standing by his side to offer advice. Varian had gone missing, and the black dragon Onyxia had replaced him with an impostor, ruling the kingdom through that puppet. Stormwind was unsettled and tumultuous until Onyxia was defeated and the real Varian Wrynn again sat upon the throne. The young king took a sip of his wine. "I remember, Genn," he said quietly. Genn gazed down at his half-eaten meal. "When I lost my boy," he said softly, his voice intense, "I lost a piece of my soul. I didn't just love Liam. I admired him. I respected him. He would have been a tremendous king." Anduin listened. "And when he fell-when that heartless, undead banshee killed him with an arrow meant for me-so much died with him. I thought I would never recover. And I didn't...not completely. But I had my wife, Mia. I had my daughter, Tess, every bit as strong and smart as her brother." Anduin did not interrupt. Genn had never been so open with him
before. Now the Gilnean king lifted his blue eyes. In the candlelight, they shimmered, and his voice was husky with emotion. "I moved on. But I had a hole in my heart where he used to be. A hole I tried to fill with my hatred for Sylvanas Windrunner." Gently, Anduin said, "That kind of hole can't be filled with hate." "No. It can't. But I met another young man who loved his people as Liam did. Who believed in things that were good, and just, and true. I found you, my boy. You're not my Liam. You're yourself. But I do catch myself trying to guide you." "You can't replace my father, and I know you know that," Anduin said, deeply moved by Genn's words. "But you're a king and a father both. You understand being both. And it helps." Genn cleared his throat. Emotions were no stranger to him, Anduin knew, but they were usually the hot, angry, violent ones. It was part of the worgen curse, yes, but Anduin knew it was also an intrinsic part of the man. Genn was not used to the softer emotions and almost always, as he did now, chased them away. "I'd be saying the same thing to Liam right now if he were here. Life is too short. Too unpredictable. For anyone in this world, especially for a king. If you love Stormwind, you need to make sure it'll go into hands that will care for it." He paused. Here it comes, Anduin thought. "Anduin, is there anyone you've considered as a possible queen? Someone to rule in your stead should you fall in battle, bear a child to carry on the Wrynn bloodline?" Anduin abruptly grew keenly interested in the food before him. Genn sighed, but it came out as more of a growl. "Times of peace are rare in this world. And they're always too brief. You need to use this time to at least start the search. If you're traveling to all these places, couldn't you have a few formal dances, or theater visits, or something?" "Believe it or not, I understand I need to do that," Anduin admitted. Genn did not know about the small box with Queen Tiffin's rings that Anduin kept close, and the younger man wasn't about to volunteer
that information. "And the answer is no, I've not met anyone yet that I've felt that way about. There's time. I'm only eighteen." "It's not uncommon for royal betrothals to occur when the participants are still in the cradle," Genn pressed. "I'm a bit of a stranger to Stormwind society, but surely there are others who could compile a list." Genn meant well, Anduin knew. But he was weary and worried, and his focus was on what to do with a wounded world, not on an arranged marriage. "Genn, I appreciate your concern," he said, choosing his words with care. "This is not an unimportant matter. I've told you I understand that. But the idea of an arranged marriage-agreeing to spend my life with someone I may not even know before making that commitment- it's abhorrent to me. Besides," he added, "you didn't have one." Genn scowled. "Just because it's not a path I chose doesn't mean it's not a sound one. I know it's not the most romantic thing in the world, but it doesn't have to be some stranger. My daughter, Tess, is close to your age. She would make-" "Quite the protest were she here at this moment," Anduin interrupted. "From the little I've seen of her, it's clear she's a remarkable woman. But she certainly has her own life, and I'm going to take a wild guess and say that I don't think queen of Stormwind is high on her list of what she wants for it." Tess Greymane, a few years his senior, was by all accounts a strongwilled woman. There had been all kinds of rumors about her actions, implying that she had taken a page or two from Mathias Shaw. He had not asked Genn about it, and now that the man had put forth his daughter as a potential queen, he wasn't about to. Genn's white brows drew together in a frown. "Anduin-" "We will revisit this topic, I promise. But for now, there's another argument I'd like to get into with you." Despite himself, Genn chuckled. "You know I'll argue with you any time, Your Majesty." "I do indeed," Anduin said, "and especially about this. After Magni's
visit, Moira, Velen, and I went to the Netherlight Temple. I don't think it would surprise you one whit to tell you that I found it to be..." He shook his head. "Truthfully, words fail me. It was serene and beautiful, and simply being there made me feel so peaceful. So focused." "The only surprise I have about your visit was how long it took you to get there," Genn said. "But then again, a king has little time for serenity and peace." "While I was there, I met two people who surprised me," he said. He took a breath. Here we go, he thought. "One of them was Calia Menethil." Genn stared. "Are you certain? Not an impostor?" "She looks a great deal like her brother. And I trust the priests of the temple have made sure her claim is true." "You place a lot of faith in the priests' goodwill." Anduin smiled. "Yes, I do." "Well, out with it. What did you learn? How did she escape? Does she still lay claim to the throne of Lordaeron, provided we can one day evict those rotting squatters who currently defile it?" Anduin smiled a bit ruefully. "I didn't press. I'll return and speak with her later. I got the impression that it wasn't a happy story." "Light knows it couldn't be," Genn said. "That poor family. What the girl must have been through. Probably escaped those wretches by the skin of her teeth. How she must despise the undead after that!" "Actually, that's the next thing I wanted to tell you.The Netherlight Temple is a hall for Azeroth's priests. All of its priests. Including Horde." He paused. "Including Forsaken." Anduin had braced himself for an angry bellow of protest. Instead, Genn calmly put down his fork and spoke in a carefully controlled voice. "Anduin," he said, "I understand that you always want to see the best in people." "It's not-" Genn held up a hand. "Please, Your Majesty. Hear me out."
Anduin frowned but nodded. "It's an admirable trait. Especially in a ruler. But a ruler must be careful that he's not played for a fool. I know you met and respected Thrall. And I know you consider Baine a friend, and he has acted with honor. Even your father negotiated with Lor'themar Theron and held Vol'jin in high esteem. But the Forsaken are...different. They don't feel things like we do anymore. They're...abominations." Anduin's voice was mild. "A current leader of the Conclave is Archbishop Faol." Genn swore and sprang to his feet. Silverware clattered to the floor. "Impossible!" His face had flushed, and a vein stood out on his neck. "That's worse than an abomination. That's blasphemy! How can you tolerate this, Anduin? Doesn't it sicken you?" Anduin thought about the impish good humor the late Alonsus Faol had displayed. The kindness, the concern. We are priests before all else. And he was. "No," Anduin said, smiling. "Quite the opposite. Seeing them there, in that place of Light...it gave me hope, Genn. The Forsaken aren't mindless Scourge. They're people. They have free will. And yes, some of them have been changed for the worse. Those have moved on in their new existence with hate and fear. But not all of them. I saw Forsaken priests speaking not only with tauren and trolls but with dwarves and draenei. They remembered the good. Moira's worked with Faol for some time now, and-" Genn swore. "Moira, too? I thought dwarves had sense! I've heard enough." He turned, about to stalk out of the room. "No, you haven't." Anduin's voice was soft but brooked no disagreement. He held out a hand and indicated the chair the other had vacated. "You'll stay, and you'll listen." Genn eyed him, surprised, then nodded in approval as he sat back down, albeit with obvious reluctance. He took a deep breath. "I will," he said. "Though I won't like it." Anduin leaned forward intently. "There's an opportunity here if we're bold enough to take it. Sylvanas gave the Forsaken life. Of course
they follow her. But the Alliance turned away from them. All we had to offer them were names-'deaders,' 'rotters.' We viewed them with fear. Disgust. We couldn't even fathom that they were people." "Were," Genn said. "They were people. Once. They're not any longer." "We've chosen to see them that way." Genn tried another tactic. "All right." He leaned back in his chair, eyes narrowed. "Let's say that you saw a few decent Forsaken, an extremely small handful, all of whom happened to be priests. Have you encountered any others like that?" There was another Anduin recalled who had most definitely not been a priest. At the trial of Garrosh Hellscream, the bronze dragons had offered both the defense and the prosecution the ability to show scenes of the past through an artifact known as the Vision of Time. In one such vision, Anduin had witnessed a conversation between a Forsaken and a blood elf in a tavern shortly before that tavern had been destroyed by those too devoted to Hellscream. The two soldiers had been against the violence and cruelty that Garrosh had personified. And they had died for their beliefs. Oh, what was the name...It began with an "F." "Farley," Anduin said. "Frandis Farley." "Who?" "A Forsaken captain who turned against Garrosh. He was outraged by the violence of Theramore. He lived right here, in Stormwind, when he was alive." Genn looked as though he couldn't even comprehend what Anduin had just said. "Frandis Farley wasn't a priest. Just a soldier who still had enough humanity left in him to understand evil when he saw it." The more Anduin worked it out, the more certain he became. "Anomalies," Greymane said. "I don't accept that," Anduin said, leaning forward. "We have no idea what the average citizen of the Undercity thinks or feels. And one thing you cannot argue with me: Sylvanas cares about her people.
They matter to her. And that may be something we can use to our advantage." "To bring her down?" "To bring her to the negotiating table." The two men regarded each other, Anduin calm and focused, Genn struggling to suppress his anger. "Her goal is to turn more of us into more of them," Genn said. "Her goal is to protect her people," Anduin insisted. "If we let her know we understand that motivation, if we can assure her that those who already exist would never be in danger from the Alliance, she's going to be a lot less likely to use Azerite to create weapons to kill us. Even better, we might actually be able to work with the Horde to save a world we both have to live in." Genn looked at him for a long moment. "You sure you didn't catch something in Ironforge?" Anduin held up a placating hand. "I know it sounds like madness. But we've never tried to understand the Forsaken. Now could be the perfect chance. Archbishop Faol and the others could help open negotiations. Each side has something the other just might want." "What do we have that the Forsaken want? And what do the Forsaken have that we could possibly want?" Anduin smiled, gently. His heart was full as he answered, "Family."
-
His quarters were dark as he entered them, illuminated only by the light of the moons. "You got my message," Anduin said aloud as he lit a single candle and looked around. The room appeared empty, but of course it wasn't. A shadow that had seemed perfectly ordinary a moment earlier shimmered, and a familiar lithe frame stepped into the faint light. "I always do," said Valeera Sanguinar. "One of these days I'm going to ask you to show me how you get in." She smiled. "I think you might be a little too heavy to manage it."
Anduin chuckled. He counted himself fortunate that there were many people he trusted. Not all kings, he knew, could say the same thing. But Valeera was on an entirely different level from even Velen or Genn Greymane. She and Varian had fought alongside each other in the gladiator pits, and Anduin had met her years ago. She had saved both his and his father's lives on more than one occasion and had pledged her loyalty to the Wrynn line. And what was almost as important was that she was able to move in circles denied to Anduin and his advisers. Valeera was a blood elf, and she was the king's personal spy. She had served Varian in that capacity during his reign, and she had aided the prince when he needed messages delivered that he asked be kept secret even from his father. Although he trusted Spymaster Shaw to do what was best for the kingdom, Anduin didn't know the man well enough to trust that he would do what was best for the king. Certainly he would not have approved of the correspondence Anduin had been carrying on for the last few years. "I assume you know about Azerite," he said. Valeera nodded her golden head, perching on a chair without waiting to be asked. "I do," she said. "I hear it can build kingdoms, bring them down, and possibly doom the world." "All that is true," Anduin confirmed. He poured them each a cup of wine and handed one to her. "I've never embraced the idea that Horde and Alliance must always be against each other. And it seems to me that now, more than ever, we have to have cooperation and trust on both sides. This new material..." He shook his head. "Far too dangerous in the hands of any enemy. And the best way to defeat an enemy is to make them a friend." The blood elf sipped her wine. "I serve you, King Anduin. I believe in you. And I am most certainly your friend and always will be. I would like to live in this world that you see. But I don't think it's possible." "Improbable," Anduin said, "but I do think it's possible. And you know better than anyone that I'm not alone in that sentiment." He handed her a letter. It was written in a personal code understood
by only a handful of individuals. Valeera took it and read. Her expression soured, but she nodded as she carefully tucked it into a pocket close to her heart. As always, she would memorize the contents in case the letter was lost or destroyed. "I will see that his surrogate receives it," Valeera promised. She did not look happy. "Be careful," she added. "No one will support this. It's doomed to failure." "But what if it works?" Anduin pressed. Valeera peered into the ruby depths of her cup, then lifted her glowing eyes to his. "Then," she said slowly and with deep reluctance, "I think I might have to stop using the word 'impossible.' "
Sylvanas Windrunner reclined on a tanned hide in the large tepee on Spirit Rise. Nathanos sat beside her. He looked uncomfortable sitting cross-legged on the ground, but if she was not allowed to sit in a chair or stand, she wouldn't let him do it, either. A blood elf mage, Arandis Sunfire, had accompanied her as well so that she could make a quick exit if things grew too dull or if an emergency called her away. He stood stiffly to the left of the pair, looking as if he wished he were anywhere but here. On Sylvanas's right was one of her rangers, Cyndia, whose perfect stillness made Arandis's rigidity look energetic. Sylvanas leaned over to Nathanos and whispered in his ear, "I am so weary of drums." To her, it was the unifying sound of the "old Horde"-the orcs, the trolls, and the tauren, of course, seemed to be willing to happily bang on the drums at any time. Now, at least, they were not the thuddingly loud war drums of the orcs but soft, steady drumming as Archdruid Hamuul Runetotem droned on about the "tragedy of Silithus." As far as Sylvanas was concerned, what had happened wasn't really tragic at all. In her opinion, a crazed titan plunging a sword into the
world had been a gift. She was keeping Gallywix's discovery quiet until she was certain about how the peculiar material could be properly utilized for maximum benefit to the Horde. Gallywix had told her he had "people on that, too." Also, what was in Silithus, really, but giant bugs and Twilight cultists, both of which the world was better without? But the tauren in particular, whose people had given the Horde its original druids and who had lost several members of the Cenarion Circle, had been devastated at the loss of life. Sylvanas had graciously sat through a ritual to honor and soothe their troubled spirits. And now she was listening to-and expected to approve-plans to send more shaman and druids to Silithus to investigate, all because Hamuul Runetotem had had a terrible dream. "The spirits cry out," Hamuul was saying. "They died in an effort to protect the land, and now only death inhabits that place. Death and pain. We must not fail our Earth Mother. We must re-create the Cenarion Hold." Baine was watching her closely. Some days she wished he would just follow his big, bleeding heart and turn the tauren to the Alliance. But her disdain for the tauren's gentleness did not eclipse her need of them. As long as Baine remained loyal-and thus far he was, where it counted-she would use him and his people to the Horde's advantage. With Baine was a troll representative, the elderly Master Gadrin. The warchief wasn't looking forward to that conversation, either. There was a power vacuum in the troll hierarchy right now, and the trolls were a chaotic people. Only now, belatedly, had she realized just how calm and centered an individual Vol'jin had been. Certainly, she hadn't realized how effortless he made leading the Horde appear. The trolls would demand a visit, too, no doubt, so they could put forth their various suggestions for a leader. Runetotem had finished his appeal. They were all looking at her now, all those furry, horned heads turned in her direction. As she was pondering her answer, one of Baine's Longwalkers, Perith Stormhoof, arrived. He was panting heavily as he bent and
whispered into his high chieftain's ear. Baine's eyes widened slightly, and his tail swished. He asked a question in Taur-ahe, to which the runner nodded. Everyone's attention was now on the tauren leader. Solemn-visaged, he rose to speak. "I have just been informed that we will soon be having a guest. He wishes to speak with you, Warchief, of what has happened in Silithus." Sylvanas tensed slightly but was outwardly calm. "Who is this visitor?" Baine was quiet for a moment, then replied, "Magni Bronzebeard. The Speaker for Azeroth. He asks that you send a mage; he is too heavy for the lift to bear him safely." Everyone started talking at once except for Sylvanas. She and Nathanos exchanged glances. Her mind was racing a thousand leagues a second. Magni couldn't have anything to say that she would appreciate hearing. He was the world's champion, and right now, the deep fissures in that world were yielding a spectacular treasure. She had to stop this, but how? All she could do, she realized, was try to minimize the damage. "I know that Magni Bronzebeard is no longer truly a dwarf," she said. "But he once was. And I know that to you, High Chieftain, the thought of formally hosting a former leader of an Alliance race must be awkward, if not outright repellent. I will relieve you of the decision whether to welcome him. I am the warchief of the Horde. Anything he has to say, he can say to me alone." Baine's nostrils flared. "I would think that you of all people would understand how a physical transformation can change one's views, Warchief. You once were a member of the Alliance. Now you lead the Horde. Magni is no longer even flesh." It was not an insult in any way, yet somehow it stung. But she could not counter the logic. "Very well. If you think it is safe, High Chieftain." The tauren and the trolls continued looking at her, and it took her a moment to realize that they were expecting her to offer the use of her mage. She pressed her lips together for a moment, then turned to
Arandis. "Will you accompany Perith to where the Speaker is awaiting us?" "Of course, Warchief," he said promptly. In the awkward minutes before all heard the hum of the portal, Sylvanas's brain was working on how best to handle the imminent conversation. When Magni appeared, the myriad facets of his diamond body reflecting the firelight, Baine greeted him warmly. "We are honored by your presence, Speaker." "Yes, we are," Sylvanas said immediately. "I am told you asked to see me." Magni nodded at Baine, accepting the welcome, before he squared his shoulders as he faced Sylvanas. He stabbed a diamond forefinger in her direction. "I did," he said, "an' there's much tae say. First, ye've got tae get rid o' yer little green men. They're just makin' a bad thing worse." Sylvanas had expected that. "They are investigating the area," she said, keeping her voice calm and mild. "Nae, they're not. They're pokin' and proddin', and Azeroth doesn't like it. She needs tae heal-or she's goin' tae die." All present listened intently as the Speaker explained that Azeroth was in agony, racked by pain that was slowly destroying her. Her very essence was seeping to the surface, and this essence was powerful beyond imagining. The last part, Sylvanas already knew. The first was troubling. "We've got tae help 'er," Magni said, his voice ragged, and this time she did not correct him. "Of course we must," she said. This revelation could undo everything. "I assume you will speak to the Alliance." "Already done," Magni said, clearly hoping to reassure her. "Young Anduin and th' Explorers' League, th' Cenarion Circle, and th' Earthen Ring are goin' tae be sending out teams tae Silithus soon." The Magni Bronzebeard who once had ruled Ironforge would never have revealed what this Speaker of Azeroth just had. This was valuable information. "Good," said Baine. "We stand ready to do the same."
He should not have spoken before his warchief, but Sylvanas was starting to get an idea. "High Chieftain Baine speaks for us all. What you have shared is grave news indeed, Speaker. Of course, we will do what we can to help. In fact," she continued, "I would like to ask the tauren to organize the Horde response." Baine blinked twice but otherwise gave no indication of how surprised he doubtless was. "It will be an honor," he said, and brought his fist to his heart in a salute. "Thank you for your warning, Speaker. We all exist on this precious world. And as recent events have brought home to all of us, there are not many places left for us to flee to should we destroy this one," Sylvanas said. "That's...mighty enlightened o' ye," Magni allowed. "Right, then. Me task is far from over. I know th' members o' the Horde and the Alliance both have trouble imaginin' that they aren't the only people in the world. But there are many other races I must warn. As ye say, Warchief, we all exist on this precious world. Call off yer goblins. Or else we might be tryin' tae find an entirely new world tae call home." Sylvanas did not promise she would, but she smiled. "Please let us save you some time as you execute this task. Where may Arandis send you next?" "Desolace, I think," Magni mused. "Need tae tell th' centaur. Thank ye, lassie." Sylvanas kept the pleasant smile on her face even as she seethed at the too-familiar, condescending term. All were quiet as Arandis conjured a portal that opened up onto the bare, ugly land, and Magni stepped through it and vanished. Hamuul sighed deeply. "It is worse even than I feared," he said. "We must begin work as soon as we can. High Chieftain, we need all those who have worked with the Alliance before to-" "No." The warchief's voice cut off the conversation with the efficiency of a blade lopping off a head.
"Warchief," Baine said calmly, "we all heard the words of the Speaker. Azeroth is badly wounded. Have we forgotten the lessons of the Cataclysm already?" Tails swished. Ears were lowered and flicked. The trolls looked down and shook their heads. Oh, yes, they all remembered the Cataclysm. "Such a thing cannot be permitted to happen a second time." I should have done this a long time ago, Sylvanas thought. She rose fluidly and went to the tauren leader. "I have words for your ears only, High Chieftain," she said, her voice a purr. "Walk with me." Baine's ears flattened against his head for a moment, but he nodded and descended the steps that led from the tepee to the rise. The rises of Thunder Bluff-Spirit Rise, Elder Rise, and Hunter Rise -were all connected to the center rise by rope bridges and planks. Sylvanas marveled quietly at the engineering. They seemed so rickety and precarious, yet they easily handled the weight of several tauren crossing at a time. Sylvanas walked without hesitation to the middle of the bridge. It swayed slightly. From there she could see the faint glow of the cavern that housed the Pools of Vision. Before she left, she would have to pay a visit there; it was the only congregation of Forsaken in the tauren capital. She needed to return home, to the Undercity, too; to meet with the Desolate Council. To assess the threat-or lack thereof-for herself. "What are these words you wish to share with me, Warchief?" Baine asked. "Are my people happy here?" The tauren cocked his head in puzzlement. "I believe so," he said. "They have all that they ask for and seem content." "The tauren befriended the Forsaken when we were rejected by the Alliance. For that I will always be grateful." Hamuul Runetotem, currently a thorn in her side, had argued successfully that the Forsaken were capable of redeeming themselves. With free will, they could choose to atone for what they had done after being murdered and enslaved to the Lich King's will. He had
convinced the warchief Thrall, who knew a thing or two about people being seen as "monsters," to admit the Forsaken into the Horde. Sylvanas would never forget that. She turned to Baine now, looking up at him. "And for that, I have looked the other way when you pursued a friendship with a certain human." "My interaction with Jaina Proudmoore has long been known," Baine said. "It was made public knowledge at Garrosh Hellscream's trial. She aided me when the Grimtotem were in rebellion against the tauren. Why does this trouble you now?" "That doesn't trouble me. What does trouble me is that you have continued to exchange correspondence with Anduin Wrynn. Do you deny it?" He was silent, but his suddenly switching tail betrayed him. Tauren were terrible liars. At last he spoke. "I have never, by word or implication, advocated anything that would bring harm to the Horde." "I believe you. That is why I have not interfered ere now. But Prince Anduin is now King Anduin. He's no longer an ineffectual, starry-eyed dreamer. He is the maker of policy. He can start a war. If you were me, would you condone secret messages sent to an Alliance king?" "What will you do?" Baine asked with remarkable calmness. "Nothing," she said, "as long as the connection is severed. And to show I do not hold a grudge at what some could understandably label treason, I stand by my offer to allow you to lead the response to help heal Azeroth. In fact"-she gestured to the cavern entrance below them -"I will speak with the Forsaken here and see if the Pools of Vision can be of any assistance. I will leave my ranger Cyndia behind. She will keep me advised of all developments." She turned back to Baine. He stood as still as if he were a statue of a tauren. Even his tail had stopped twitching. "Do we understand each other?" "Perfectly, Warchief. Is that all?" "It is. I hope this conversation marks the beginning of a new level of cooperation between the tauren and the Forsaken." Baine followed her, a looming hulk of silence, as they returned to the
tepee. She informed those who were waiting there of her suggestion that the Forsaken of the Pools of Vision work with the tauren as they sought to heal the world. When Hamuul spoke of a new Cenarion Hold in Silithus, one of the trolls spoke up. "An' what of da goblins? Dey be dere thick as flies," the troll said. "Ya gonna pull dem out like da Speaker said?" "The goblins," said Sylvanas, "know about the deep places of the world better than any other members of the Horde. I have spoken with Gallywix, and he assures me that they are exploring and investigating." When it appeared as though several were ready to object to this, she forestalled them by saying, "He reports directly to me. And when I am ready, I will share what I have learned with the Horde." "But not the Alliance?" Runetotem said. Sylvanas very carefully did not look at Baine as she replied. "Magni has already spoken to the Alliance. I am quite certain Anduin will not be sending couriers to Orgrimmar with their latest discoveries. Why should I?" "Because this world belongs to all of us," Runetotem said quietly. Sylvanas smiled. "Perhaps one day soon, 'all of us' will mean 'Horde.' In the meantime, I put the interests and welfare of my people before the Alliance who destroyed Taurajo. I suggest all of you do as well." "But-" the archdruid began. She turned to him, her face cold, composed, but her eyes hot, angry fire. "Object again and I will not take it well. Vol'jin and his loa named me the warchief of the Horde. And as warchief of the Horde, I decide what is important to reveal-and when and to whom. Is that understood?" Hamuul's ears flattened against his skull, but he spoke calmly enough. "Yes, Warchief."
THE UNDERCITY Parqual Fintallas had been a historian when he still drew breath. He'd known all there was to know about Lordaeron and remembered, with a great deal of fondness, time spent with his wife, Mina, and his daughter, Philia, in his modest but comfortable chambers in Capital City. Even now, he could recall the smell of the ink and the parchment as he scribbled notes from various musty old tomes, and the golden, honey hue of the light that filtered in. The crackle of the fire, warm and comforting as he worked late into the night by the light of candles. Sometimes Mina would send in Philia to deliver his supper when he was too engrossed to come to the table. He'd pull her onto his lap when she was young and invite her to sit with him when she was older, encouraging her to browse through the massive library while he feasted on Mina's excellent cooking. But there was no crackling fire here in the Undercity, no smells of parchment and ink and delicious food prepared with love by a warm and wise lifemate. No child to pester him with questions he'd loved to answer. Only coldness, dampness, the sickly smell of rot, and the eerie green glow of the tainted river that flowed throughout the subterranean necropolis. Those memories were too fresh to be anything but painful, yet how sweet they still were. The Forsaken were strongly discouraged from revisiting places they had loved in life. Their home was no longer Lordaeron but the Undercity, a place that, like the inhabitants who no longer had need of sleep, didn't distinguish between day and night. Once or twice, Parqual had sneaked into his former lodgings, smuggling books into the Undercity. But he had been caught once and admonished. His books had been confiscated. There is no need to remember the human history of this place, he had been told. Only the history of the Undercity matters now. Over the years, he'd made use of adventurers to acquire more books, each one precious to him. But he could not use adventurers who
sought gold or fame to bring back what had gone. Mina was either dead or a gibbering monstrosity. And Philia, his bright, beautiful girl, was still human, possibly still alive. But even so, she would be horrified at what had become of her beloved papa. For the longest time, he had thought himself unique in his wistfulness. But then Vellcinda had founded the Desolate Council to take care of the city in the Dark Lady's absence. What had begun purely as necessity had, for Parqual at least, become something so much more. It had given him a sense of camaraderie and the knowledge that not everyone was content simply to serve without questioning. The Forsaken might not be living, but they had needs, desires, emotions that were not being met. Vellcinda believed that Sylvanas would visit soon and would listen to what the council had to say. Parqual sincerely hoped she was right, but he had his doubts. Sylvanas needed to stop forcing them to live again if they did not wish to; she needed to allow them to embrace their former lives as well as their undeath. History taught that those who had power were generally loath to relinquish any of it unless they were forced to do so. And in all his years of life and undeath, Parqual had seldom found history's lessons to be wrong.
The capital of the night elves was one of Anduin's favorite places, though he had seldom been able to travel there. The kaldorei were a beautiful people, and so was their city, nestled securely in the embrace of the massive World Tree, Teldrassil. Anduin stood now beside High Priestess Tyrande Whisperwind and her beloved, the archdruid Malfurion Stormrage, in the Temple of the Moon. Serenity enveloped this place as the tenders of the temple went about their duties with grace and purpose. The rhythmic sound of softly splashing water was soothing, and the statue of Haidene, holding aloft the bowl from which the moonwell's radiant liquid flowed, was calming to behold. His mind went back to the Netherlight Temple. The Light finds us, he thought. All of us. It chooses the story, or the face, or the name, or the song that resonates the most with each of us. We may call it Elune, or An'she, or just the Light, but it doesn't matter. We can turn away from it if we desire, but it's always there. He caught Tyrande watching him, a slight smile curving her lips. She understood.
"I regret that I have not been a more frequent visitor to your beautiful city," he said aloud. "War by its nature conspires to keep us all from places that nurture the spirit," Tyrande said. With a sigh, Anduin turned away from the statue and faced the pair of leaders. "My letter outlined the nature of the current battle we face," he said. "A battle to heal our world. Has Magni come to you yet?" "Not yet," Malfurion said. "It is a wide world, and Speaker for it he may be, but there is much ground to cover. We had already sent members of the Cenarion Circle back to Silithus after...after the tragedy. We wanted to assess the damage." We have eyes on it, Shaw had told him earlier. "Not for the first time, and I'm certain not for the last, I am grateful for the strong bonds between our peoples," Anduin said. "What did the Circle learn?" The two exchanged a look. Then, "Come," said Malfurion. "Let us ride." Anduin walked with them through the springy grass of the temple and out the arched doorway. Two Sentinels, the fierce female soldiers who guarded the city, awaited them with three nightsabers. "Do you know how to ride one?" Tyrande asked with a smile. "I've ridden gryphons, hippogryphs, and horses," Anduin said, "but not a nightsaber." "They are similar to a gryphon, but with a smoother gait. I think you will enjoy it." There was a spotted black one, one that had a soft gray coat, and a white one with black stripes that reminded the young king of the great White Tiger, Xuen, whom he had met in Pandaria. Too much so; he felt it would be almost disrespectful to ride it. He opted for the gray one, swinging himself into the saddle with ease. The big cat looked back at him, grunted, and shook its head before settling into a rhythmic lope that was as comfortable as Tyrande had promised. "I believe it is as grim as the Speaker made it out to be," Malfurion said as the three made their way down the carpeted ramp and over the
white marble stone, heading away from the temple. He kept his voice pitched softly. "Everyone in the Cenarion Hold and throughout the region was killed at once." "I sent priestesses when I heard," Tyrande said, and left it at that. Anduin thought bleakly of the horrifying sight that must have greeted the gentle Sisters of Elune. More than the world was wounded by Sargeras. The only consolation was that the mad titan had, after so long cutting a swath of destruction and torment throughout the universe, finally been imprisoned. "Our first thought was to send groups of druids and priestesses to create moonwells," Malfurion continued. It made good sense. Moonwells contained sacred waters that could heal wounds and restore energy and vitality, and they often were put to use purifying corrupted areas. Or in this case, healing wounded ones. "Did you meet with success?" Anduin asked. "It is too early to tell. Most of our groups have not even had an opportunity to create one. The goblins are hard at work plundering Azeroth," Malfurion said, his normally pleasant, deep voice a rumble of wounded anger. "And there is plenty for them to exploit. As Magni told you, the essence of the world has come to the surface, and in great supply. We ourselves found a vein." A vein. Anduin's mind went immediately to the intricate network of veins and arteries that went through a living body. Strange how so long ago, well before anyone understood that Azeroth was a sleeping nascent titan, the term "vein" had been used to describe the ribbons of various minerals that ran throughout the world. Malfurion turned his black-striped nightsaber to the right, heading toward the Warrior's Terrace. As they passed the citizens of Darnassus, many turned to regard the sight of the young Stormwind king, bowing and waving to him. Anduin smiled and returned the waves, although the subject matter he was discussing with the Darnassian onlookers' leaders was a bleak one. "We obtained some samples to study," Malfurion continued. "It is..."
The archdruid, Anduin knew, was well over ten thousand years old. Yet this substance left him at a loss for words. For a moment, the night elf seemed almost overcome. Riding closely beside and in perfect synchronization with her husband, Tyrande reached out to him, squeezing his arm briefly in silence. Anduin regarded Malfurion with deep sympathy. "I have held it," he said quietly. "I know how it affected me. I cannot imagine how it must have moved those so deeply connected to nature and the land." "I cannot deny the magnificence of it-or the power, for good or ill. And Tyrande and I-all the kaldorei-will do everything we can to prevent its misuse." The Warrior's Terrace loomed up ahead. At the top, standing at attention, a unit of five Sentinels awaited them. Their leader was an elf with long dark blue hair pulled back in a ponytail. Her skin was pale reddish-purple, and the traditional markings on her face looked like claw marks. Like all her sisters, she was strong and lithe and fierce. But unlike many of the Sentinels Anduin had met before, she did not have a hardened expression. Tyrande slipped off her saber and greeted the Sentinel warmly. Anduin and Malfurion, too, dismounted. One hand on the Sentinel's shoulder, Tyrande turned to her guest. "King Anduin Wrynn," she said, and Anduin realized that it would take a long time for him to grow used to that title, "may I present Captain Cordressa Briarbow." The captain turned to Anduin and inclined her head. "I am honored," she said. "A pleasure, Captain," Anduin said. "I remember you from the trial in Pandaria." She smiled. "I am flattered you recall." "We have been in communication with the Explorers' League," Tyrande said. "Ordinarily, they provide their own protection. But given the state of Silithus at this moment, I have offered them the aid of Cordressa's unit." Her eyes flashed. "Goblins are not to be trifled with, and with them present in so many numbers, the area is
dangerous." "A wise decision," Anduin said. "I am certain there will be several expeditions. I will assign some of my units to protective duty as well." Anduin was no lover of war, but he knew that others thrived on combat. This would allow them to utilize their training in a positive way. "Druids and shaman can take care of themselves," Malfurion said, "but the members of the Explorers' League are generally archaeologists and scientists. And right now they are doing precious work." Their attention was drawn by a soft swirl of white a few feet away, accompanied by the distinctive sound of a portal opening. A moment later, a gnome, all eyebrows and mustache, stepped through. Gold embroidery on his violet tabard depicted the all-seeing eye that was the symbol of the Kirin Tor. What did the most powerful magi in Azeroth want with Tyrande and Malfurion? Anduin wondered. But when the gnome trundled directly up to him, the king realized it wasn't the leaders of Darnassus that the Kirin Tor had come to see. "Greetings, High Priestess, Archdruid," the gnome said, nodding to the much bigger night elves. "King Anduin, this message is for you." "Thank you." Light, please let this not be more bad news. Our poor world cannot handle it. He broke the seal and read, feeling all eyes on him.
To Anduin Wrynn, King of Stormwind, Kalecgos of the Kirin Tor gives greetings. Your Majesty, I hope this finds you well. I understand you embarked on a journey to thank your fellow Alliance members for their role in winning a terrible war. It is exactly the sort of thing I would expect of you, my friend, and I hope it goes well. Our Mutual Friend paid me an unexpected visit just now. I believe we will not be seeing her again any time
soon. But I have faith that she will return, and her mind will be the calmer and clearer for her retreat from this world. It is difficult to heal when a wound is constantly being reopened. I know nothing about where she will be, but I felt you would wish to hear. -K
"Is all well, Your Majesty?" Malfurion asked quietly. It was, overall, good news. At the same time, Anduin again regretted that Jaina still seemed to be lost. He hoped, as Kalec did, that she would find the answers, and the peace, she sought. "Yes," he said. "An update on a personal matter. Nothing dire." "Do you wish me to carry a response?" the gnome courier inquired. "You may tell Kalecgos that I have received the message and I share his hopes. Thank you." The gnome nodded. "Good day, then!" His small hands made motions that Anduin could not quite follow, and the air before the courier shimmered. Anduin caught a glimpse of the beautiful floating city of Dalaran for just an instant, then the gnome stepped through the portal. It faded behind him. Anduin turned to Malfurion and Tyrande. "The letter concerned Jaina," he said. "She is safe, according to Kalecgos." "That is good news," Tyrande said, "though it makes me wonder why she did not choose to fight alongside us against the Legion after the Broken Shore. Will she be returning?" Anduin shook his head. "Not immediately, at any rate. Hopefully one day." "And may that day be soon," Malfurion said. "The world needs all the champions it can find." "It does," Anduin said slowly, thinking. His plan had been to rendezvous with Velen at the Exodar. He had spent much time there a few years earlier, and it was the closest thing he had to a second home. He yearned to walk its crystalline halls once more and to speak with the warm, friendly draenei.
But Velen already had enlightened the draenei about what Magni had revealed in Ironforge. Down to the littlest one, they were all probably hard at work already. The Exodar and Velen did not need him right now. His task was to spread the news to others and spur them on to action. And that was a task he could not do alone. Anduin made a decision. He would not be traveling to the Exodar. He would return to Stormwind briefly, and then he would travel to the third place that, in his heart, he felt he could call home: the Netherlight Temple.
It was very late when Anduin returned from Teldrassil. He used his hearthstone to avoid disturbing anyone. Wyll had been asleep for several hours, and Anduin didn't feel like getting into discussions with Genn Greymane just yet. There was, however, someone he did very much wish to speak with, and he wanted to give her a chance to report with news before he left for the Netherlight Temple. He had materialized in the receiving room where he and his father had shared so many meals, arguments, and discussions. A ghost of a smile touched his lips, along with the ache of loss; then he turned and went to his private quarters, lit a candle, and placed it in the window. That task done, he tended to another one-filling his growling stomach. After descending into the kitchen, quiet at this hour, he heaped a plate with bread, Dalaran sharp, and goldenbark apples. When Anduin returned to his chambers, he closed the door behind him and said, "I'll feel silly if I'm talking to myself." "You're not." Valeera was there. Anduin started to smile, then saw the expression on her face. All at once, he lost his appetite. "Something's wrong," he said. When she didn't deny it, Anduin's
heart sank. "Tell me." She closed her eyes, then mutely handed him a letter. For a moment, Anduin didn't want to read it. He wanted to stay in this place of innocent ignorance. But that was not granted to a king, not one who wanted to be a good leader of his people, at any rate. He swallowed hard. "Is he safe?" "For the moment." Valeera jerked her head at the letter. At least the worst hasn't happened, Anduin thought. But he suspected he knew what was in the letter now. With a heavy heart, he unfolded the letter, which was written in the agreed-upon code. He translated it as he read.
For years, I have cherished our friendship. I cherish it still. But with great reluctance and for the sake of those who look to me for protection, I know the time has come when I must sever it.
Anduin's stomach clenched. She knows. He continued reading.
I will not put my people nor you, friend, at further risk. I still believe that there will come a day when we can speak openly, with the support of all our people. But that day has not yet come. Earth Mother watch over you.
Anduin had half expected this once Sylvanas had become leader of the Horde. But even so, it felt like a physical blow. Ever since the day he had accidentally materialized in the middle of a meeting between Baine Bloodhoof and Jaina Proudmoore, he had liked the tauren leader. Like Baine, Anduin had thought they were friends. But all at once he was besieged by doubt. Baine had expressed his sympathies about Varian's death,
reminding Anduin that he, too, had lost a father. The initial reports from Genn Greymane and others were that Sylvanas had betrayed them, abandoning Varian and presumably every other member of the Alliance, to die when she retreated with no warning from the Broken Shore. Baine, who had been there, had told Anduin a different story. Another wave of demons had appeared, he said, and Sylvanas reported that a dying Vol'jin had ordered her to sound the retreat. Had Baine lied to him? No. Anduin's heart was sore, but there was no warning of danger or deceit from his once-shattered bones. Baine had told the truth as he knew it. Yet no one but Sylvanas, it seemed, had actually heard the order from Vol'jin. I will not let Sylvanas tarnish my faith in Baine, he thought resolutely. With a deep sigh, he rose and tossed the letter into the fire, watching as the flames flared brightly and reduced the parchment to a blackened writhing ball and then to ashes. "Did Perith accept my letter?" Anduin asked, forcing his voice to be calm and level. "No," Valeera replied. Another gut punch. "He thought it would endanger his chieftain. There are eyes upon him." "Perith is very wise," Anduin replied. "But he said he would tell Baine what the letter said." "I had so hoped that Baine would support my plan." "He may yet." "Or he may do nothing that smacks of disloyalty. I can't blame him. I'd do the same. A leader who jeopardizes his people is no leader at all." Anduin kept his gaze on the flames. Valeera stepped beside him. "There is one thing more," she said. "Baine wanted you to have this." She extended her hand. A small piece of what looked like bone, no larger than Anduin's fingernail, rested in her gloved palm. It took Anduin a few seconds to comprehend what he was looking at, and when he did, his breath caught.
This was a piece of Baine's horn, chipped off in an offering of respect and friendship. His hand closed slowly around it. "I'm sorry, Anduin. I know what a disappointment this is." She did, too. He looked down at her, smiling sadly, recalling the days not so long ago when she was much taller than he was. "I know," he said. "And I thank you for it. For everything. It seems each passing day reduces the number of people I can rely on." "I hope you will always count me among that group," Valeera said. "Never doubt that," Anduin assured her. Her eyes searched his for a moment. "You are a kind person, Anduin. It's in your nature to think the best of people. But you're also a king," Valeera said quietly. "You cannot afford to trust unwisely." "No," he agreed sadly. "I can't." They stood by the fire in silence for a long time.
SILITHUS The two moons were out tonight. Sapphronetta Flivvers, peering up at them after a long day of travel and setting up camp, said to her companion, "You know, they're really very beautiful." The night elf Sentinel, Cordressa Briarbow, said, "Do you know their names?" Heat came into the gnome's round face. "Um...one of them is the Blue...ah...something." At the night elf's soft chuckle, Saffy blushed even more deeply. Her former husband had always told her how cute she was when she blushed, which Saffy detested and which made her flush-not blush!-with anger whenever he said it. Which of course just made him happier. "I'm sorry," she said. "I've spent almost my whole life underground or in a lab, you see. I'm afraid I don't get outside very much." "You are well versed in so very many things I could never understand, Sapphronetta," Cordressa said gently. "No one can know everything." "Try telling that to my ex-husband." Again the soft chuckle. "The moons are named the Blue Child and the White Lady, the Child's mother. The White Lady has different names. My people call her Elune. The tauren call her Mu'sha. Once every 430 years, something truly marvelous occurs. The moons align with one another, and for a few precious, glorious moments it looks as though the Lady is holding her Child. Our world is bathed in a bluewhite radiance, and time itself seems to stand still if you look upon it with an open heart." Gazing at the beautiful orbs, Saffy let out a soft breath of awe. "When did it last happen?" she asked, wondering if she'd learned this interesting tidbit in time to witness the event. "Five years ago." Saffy's face fell. "Oh," she said. "Guess I probably won't be around to
see it." The long-lived elf, who probably would be around to see it, did not reply. "But you can see them both now in the beautiful, clear sky of the desert." That was probably the first time Saffy had heard the word "beautiful" to describe anything concerning Silithus. Even before it had a gargantuan sword sticking out of it, by all accounts it was a hideous place. Her gaze traveled to the sword now. It was hard to miss. Not only was it humongous, but it was surrounded by a creepy aura of red light, so it was an eyesore at any time of day and night. The black monstrosity had been plunged halfway into the poor ground. Steaming fissures had been revealed, yielding the mysterious Azerite in its two forms-fluid and hardened blue-gold chunks. Saffy was more than a little frustrated that Mekkatorque and Brann Bronzebeard had sent her off on the expedition before she'd had a chance to actually touch the stuff. Their notes were useful, but she couldn't wait to see-and feel-the substance herself. And the desert that surrounded the sword was hot, filled with insects of all shapes and sizes, cultists, mysterious things lurking in ruins...that was beautiful? Well, all right, Saffy could agree that the sky was beautiful. She sneaked a glance upward at her companion, her face upturned and bathed with light as she smiled slightly. Other members of the Explorers' League, too, had paused to regard the pair of moons. Again Saffy looked up at them as well. How could they be so placid, the Blue Child and the White Lady? Just-sailing through the night sky, blissfully unaware that below them a giant sword was sticking out of the world! That was when Saffy realized she'd spoken out loud. She clapped a hand over her mouth. Expecting laughter or chastisement for her outburst, she was surprised when Cordressa placed a gentle hand on her shoulder, having to stoop to do so. "You but say what we all think," she said. "Their peace is enviable. But we know better. In a way, I envy the druids of the Cenarion Circle and the shaman of the Earthen Ring. They are looking at means to
help Azeroth directly. That must be very gratifying." Now it was Saffy's turn to reassure the night elf. "The Explorers' League has a role here, too. Last time things went bad in this place, it's because something very old got riled up." She stabbed a finger in the direction of the sword. "Magni told us that Azeroth was hurting. But we also don't know how deep that thing goes; what Sargeras might have disturbed or awoken that's also contributing to her distress. And this time, we're walking right into an area that we know to be dangerous. High Priestess Tyrande and you are helping Azeroth by protecting us." Us. It was Saffy's first expedition, though she'd been a consultant member back at the Hall of Explorers for a while. The whole thing was terribly exciting, though that was tempered by the proximity of so many goblins. Cordressa smiled down at her. "I have not worked much with your people," she said. "But if you are a typical representative of the gnomes, I clearly need to rectify that." Saffy blushed again. "We all just do what we can," she said. She had been tapped because she was a well-recognized geologist specializing in mineralogy. The archaeologists on the team would be looking for Old Gods, ancient doomsday technology-the usual sorts of things. Saffy had been brought into the mix specifically to study Azerite. Provided they could actually get to any Azerite. The goblins-oh, how she hated goblins-were squatting on the visible seams of the stuff and conducting eye-hurtingly ugly mining forays. For the last two days, the league members had stayed safely away, observing with the telescopes and various contraptions with which Mekkatorque had furnished them. Frustrating and crude as this method was, Saffy already had learned a great deal from her observation. For one thing, Azerite was liquid when it bled from the earth, turning solid only when it was exposed to air. Fascinating! The other thing was that the ground near the sword was warm all the time, not just during daylight hours. Deserts had wildly fluctuating
temperatures, from scorching in the day, to if not exactly chilly at least considerably colder at night. Not Silithus, not now. Saffy was itching to get her hands on more of the material. She'd been added to the team after the Stormwind king had visited Ironforge, leaving with them only a small chunk to study. The next task would be to send out scouts to obtain more samples of Azerite, preferably from a variety of locales. Then Saffy would get to do what she loved to do: analyze, study, and understand. It pained-physically pained-her to think about all those goblins messing around with this precious substance. The only value it had to them was how they could "transmute" gold liquid into gold coins. Goblins. How could anyone stand doing business with them? Filthy things. It was all about the boom and the flash and the noise, not the science of it all. "Your thoughts are not happy ones, Sapphronetta," Cordressa said. Saffy realized that although her face was still turned up to the moons, she was scowling. "Come. Let us eat something. Then some of my sister Sentinels will stay and guard you while you sleep." "Some?" The night elf smiled, her eyes glowing in the darkness as brightly as the moons did. "Some. And some others will begin the first scouting mission." That made sense. The kaldorei were called night elves for a reason other than the twilight hues of their skin and hair. They were used to hunting in the nighttime hours. Saffy was thrilled. "Maybe you will return with some samples I can study!" "Maybe, although I expect samples will come later. You must cultivate patience. More likely, we will return tonight with information on the enemy's numbers and locations. Maybe intel on their plans, too." Smiling impishly, she tapped one long purple ear. "Not only do we see well, we hear well, too." Saffy laughed.
-
Dinner, as was always the case whenever dwarves were involved, was hearty, stick-to-your-ribs fare washed down with plenty of beer. Saffy didn't want to think too hard about what was "beer basted" out here. She'd heard one of the Sentinels talking fondly about the gooey spider legs she'd grown up on, and that had been quite enough. After the meal, two Sentinels, including Cordressa, slipped quietly out into the warm night. The leader of the expedition, Gavvin Stoutarm, gathered the five members of the league and addressed them. "We're a tight-knit bunch," he said, "an' we're nae too accustomed tae night elves bein' part o' our number." Although the Explorers' League was open to all races of the Alliance, it seemed to appeal mostly to humans and dwarves, with the odd gnome or worgen showing up now and then. Night elves were a rare sight, as they were usually against disturbing the earth for the purpose of removing artifacts from where they lay hidden. "I'm proud o' how ye all have interacted wi' 'em. We're all on this poor world together, an' we're all pullin' together. No offense tae other guards we've had, but I fer one will be sleepin' sounder than usual tonight." "Och, Gavvin, ye'll be sleepin' sounder because ye drank about six pints o' brew!" Guffaws filled the night air, with Gavvin Stoutarm, who certainly had indulged his thirst, laughing the loudest. "Off tae yer bedrolls wi' ye," he said. Despite the reassuring words, Saffy found sleep elusive. She tossed and turned, first in her bedroll and then on it-it was so terribly hot- and then back in it because she realized that outside the bedroll meant insects. And sand. She huddled, sweltering, listening to the loud nighttime sounds of four dwarves snoring loudly enough to wake the dead. It was a good thing there were Sentinels standing guard, she thought. Stoutarm's wheezing and snorting otherwise would have brought the goblins
down on them in droves just to shut him up. Saffy must have been more tired than she thought. Somewhere between the snores and the insects and the heat and the sand, she drifted off to sleep. She awoke to the hideous sound of goblin bellowing, the crack of rifles, and the clang of steel against steel. Bolting upright, struggling to escape the confining swaths of fabric, Saffy went for the pistol she kept under her pillow and scrambled to her feet. Her heart thudded wildly in her chest as she glanced about frantically, barely able to take in the scene playing out before her. The moons' light, so pleasant and calming earlier, now seemed cold and uncaring as it illuminated the bodies of two dead Sentinels. Their blood looked black in the pale blue light, and the glow had fled their eyes, leaving them dark pools of shadow. There was another body, too -a body Saffy didn't want to look at for fear the panic that was clawing at the back of her brain would swoop to the forefront and shut down her ability to think, Saffy, think- Her former husband had insisted that she have a weapon. She told him she'd take a lab over an arsenal any day, but right now she wished she'd practiced with the thing. Why hadn't she taken her Lightning Blast 3000 with her? She'd actually gotten it working- Saffy gripped the pistol with small, shaking hands, jerking it around toward the noise of each new horror that unfolded. Loud, fierce dwarven swearing brought a rush of joyful tears to her eyes. Gavvin Stoutarm, at least, was still alive and kicking-and punching, and biting, from the angry sound of a squealing goblin. The gnome's soft mouth set in a hard line. She forced her hands to stop shaking and focused not on the awful, gut-wrenching sounds her friends made as they were fighting and- -dying, Saffy, they're dying- -and she pointed the pistol at a squat, large-eared shape that was blotting out the horizon's stars. She squeezed the trigger. There was a gratifying shout of pain. The resulting boom had knocked her back, and she scrambled to her feet
only to discover to her horror that the goblin hadn't been dispatched but was merely enraged. "Why, you little-" Saffy fired again, but this time the shot went wide as the dark shape reached out and seized her arm. He squeezed it hard, and with a gasp of fear and fury the mineralogist was forced to drop the gun. "Hey! Kezzig, that's a gnome lady!" "Yeah," Saffy's assailant said, making a fist and drawing back his arm, "and I'm gonna punch the living-oh." The fist paused in midmotion. "Maybe she's not the right one." "She fits the description perfectly. You know the rules." "Yeah, yeah, stupid rules," the goblin named Kezzig muttered. He lowered his fist. Saffy took the opportunity to squirm, simultaneously attempting to twist free and bite the muscled arm. Kezzig shrieked in pain but didn't release her. "Okay, you little spitfire, all bets are off." The last thing Sapphronetta Flivvers saw was a huge, dark fist silhouetted against the too-calm, too-dispassionate night sky.
The sense of peace that stole over Anduin as he entered the Netherlight Temple was balm to a spirit still wounded from Valeera's news regarding Baine. It felt as if someone had tucked a thick, warm blanket around him while he lay cold and shivering. He smiled softly to himself and once again marveled at the Light's ability to comfort. Archbishop Faol glanced up from an old tome he'd been perusing as Anduin approached. The glow in his dead eyes increased with pleasure, and his lips twisted in a smile. "Anduin!" he exclaimed in that curiously warm voice, obviously remembering that the king of Stormwind had asked him not to use the formal title. "I had not expected to see you again quite so soon. Sit down, sit down!" He gestured to a chair beside him. Anduin returned the Forsaken's smile with one of his own, accepting the offered seat. Even as he did so, he mentally shook his head. Sitting comfortably beside a Forsaken. It was something he'd never really thought would happen. If only everyone could experience the peace of the Netherlight Temple, he thought. Maybe then we'd stop trying to kill one another.
Faol chuckled, that raspy sound, as of two pieces of parchment rubbing together. "Tell me all about your visit to Teldrassil." A blood elf priest approached with a bottle of fruit nectar and a glass. Anduin thanked him. Pouring, he said, "The night elves can always be relied on to care for the world. By the time I visited Darnassus, they had already dispatched several groups of priestesses and druids into Silithus to create moonwells." "Ah, moonwells. I never saw one while I lived, and, well, I try not to get wet these days. But I hear they are sights to behold." "They are. If the kaldorei are successful, this could help Azeroth greatly. They are also sending Sentinels to accompany less militaristic organizations such as the Explorers' League." "This all sounds quite positive," Faol said. "It is," Anduin said. "But I think we can do more. I'm going to emulate the night elves and send along some of Stormwind's finest as well. What's happening to the world...we can't afford to lose those who might be able to find a solution to it. I thought I would come back and see how your priests were doing in spreading the word." "Of course!" Faol said. "I'm proud to say that we've all stepped up to the challenge." He looked up and beckoned. "Calia, my dear, won't you come join us?" As Calia approached them, Faol continued, "She wants so much to help. I've appointed her our liaison to the Alliance races, whereas I've been familiarizing myself with all kinds of new parts of Azeroth by visiting Horde members. It's been most enlightening!" Calia now stood beside Anduin, looking from one to the other. "It's good to see you again, Anduin," she said. "Our young friend has just returned from Teldrassil," said Faol. "He says the night elves are already hard at work, and I informed him that we've not been shirking our duties, either." "I'm glad to hear it," Anduin said. "Actually, I came here hoping to speak with both of you on another topic as well, if we have time." "Ha!" said Faol, delighted, as Calia slipped gracefully into the seat beside Anduin. "Saa'ra will be so jealous; usually everyone comes to
see it. As for time, we have nothing but it in this place. It has done the Conclave good not to stay cloistered here but to be out and about in the world again. Now, then. You've visited Ironforge and Teldrassil, and it sounds like both have already taken immediate steps." For the next several minutes, Calia and Faol gave Anduin a rundown of where they had traveled and where they had sent others to travel. "We try to take into account whom we're talking to," Calia said. "For instance, if we are traveling to the Echo Isles, we send one of our trolls. To Tranquillien, a blood elf. "Some have already heard," Calia said, "and I regret to tell you that some are still more interested in mining the Azerite than in helping Azeroth." Anduin nodded. "Not unexpected, though it's extremely unfortunate." He sighed. "It does sound like we've done what we can. We just have to protect the Azerite as much as possible and attempt to ensure the Horde doesn't acquire much of it." Even as he said the words, Anduin knew the idea was nothing but wishful thinking. For some reason, the goblins had figured things out first. They had descended on Silithus en masse and set up mines and ways to process the material before Shaw could even report back to Anduin. That battle might be lost already, and the thought pained him. But there might be one way to fight back against the Horde without fighting at all. Anduin had hoped to have Baine quietly helping from the other side, but that was not to be. If this idea was to work, it would be up to Anduin. He folded his hands in front of him and looked from Calia to Faol. "I wanted to discuss the Forsaken," he said. "And I apologize in advance if I sound ignorant or insulting." Faol waved his words away. "No need at all to apologize. Asking questions is how we learn, and I happen to have some answers." Despite the archbishop's assurance, Anduin was convinced he'd sound rude. He was beginning to think that discretion was the better part of valor and that he'd be best served by excusing himself now. "I had seen Forsaken before now," he said. "And I was aware that
they-you-were not mindless, raving Scourge. I also never thought you were inherently evil." "But you thought us capable of doing evil things," Faol said. "Don't worry about that. That's nothing more than being observant. I'll be the first to admit the Forsaken have done terrible things. But so have humans. Even the tauren have a skeleton or two in their closet- metaphorically speaking, of course." Anduin grinned, pleased that Faol understood him, and continued. "I found them...less relatable than the other Horde races, even though many used to be human. Perhaps because they used to be human. The Alliance turned them away. People that in life they knew. Maybe even had loved." "Fear is a powerful emotion," Calia said quietly. Something in the tone of her voice, in the way she held her body, brought home to Anduin that her astounding journey of survival had to have been harrowing, perhaps beyond his ability to understand. She sat with her hands in her lap, tightly clasped, and he saw that they trembled. "Calia," he said before he could stop himself, "how did you possibly survive?" She lifted her sea-blue eyes to his. All over again he was reminded that she was Arthas's sister, familiar to him though he had never met her. Her smile was sad. "By fate and by the Light's mercy," she said. "One day I will tell you. But it is still too...too close. Not just my journey, but...I lost people I loved, you see." Anduin nodded. "Of course. Your father...and brother." It was a painful, ugly story. Arthas, corrupted by the sword Frostmourne and pulled step by step from the path of the Light by the whispers of the Lich King, had not simply turned the citizens of Lordaeron into monsters. He had used a public welcoming ceremony as a chance to murder his father as Terenas sat upon his throne. Anduin suddenly, sickly realized that it was possible-no, probable, a near certainty- that Calia Menethil had witnessed that murder. Again he marveled that she had been able to escape.
"Not just them," Calia said. "Others I loved as well." The king's eyes widened. Did she have a family of her own? "I understand. I'm sorry if I caused you any distress." He bit his lip, wondering if he should continue. She seemed to sense his dilemma and straightened a little, giving him a wan smile. "Go ahead. Ask me what you will. I can't promise I'll answer, but I will if I can." "You had to have had a terrifying experience with the undead," he said quietly. "How is it that you are so close with the archbishop?" Calia relaxed and smiled at her old friend. "He helped save me," she said. "I remembered him, you see. And in the midst of all that horror, when I was constantly fleeing so many I loved whose minds and wills had been stolen from them...to see the face of someone who was still who he had been-" She shook her head, in awe of the moment even now, it would seem. "It was as if hope itself was a sword that stabbed clean through me. Except instead of wounding, it offered me the chance to move through my shock and pain to a place of healing. So you see, for me, the Forsaken weren't monsters. They were friends. It was the Scourge, the shambling, stumbling things that wore my friends' faces-they had become monsters." Faol appeared genuinely moved by her words, and Anduin wondered if he'd ever heard them before. The archbishop took her hand, patting her healthy human flesh gently with his withered, almost mummified fingers. "Dear child," he said. His voice was thick, as if with unshed tears. Could Forsaken weep? Anduin realized that he had no idea. There was so much about them that he didn't know. "Dear, dear child. The joy was mine at finding you alive." Anduin was glad he had come. It had been, beyond a doubt, the right decision. "There's something I'd like to do," he said, "and I'd like the two of you to help me." "Of course, if we can," Faol replied. "A terrible war has come to an end. One that has harmed both
Horde and Alliance. Tens of thousands of lives were lost, including those of Vol'jin and my father. Now we hear that our own world might be another casualty, with a precious substance that I cannot in good conscience allow to fall into hostile hands. The goblins certainly know about it, and Sylvanas is probably already plotting how to use it against us. But that's not happened yet. We have an opportunity here to come together-truly come together-and work on a large scale the way the Earthen Ring and the Cenarion Circle do. The way this temple does." They were both listening. They did not scoff at his passion for peace as Greymane did or regard him with skeptical compassion as Valeera did. Encouraged, Anduin continued. "Already, either Sylvanas or other factions have murdered innocent people who have done nothing but try to learn about the world's wound. I have an idea on how we can stop that. But I can't implement it directly. Not yet." He paused. What he was about to say should have grown easier with time, but it had not. "Many believe Sylvanas deliberately betrayed my father and the Alliance at the Broken Shore. No one on our side is going to advocate extending an offer of peace without getting something in return." Faol looked at him searchingly. "Do you believe she betrayed King Varian?" he asked calmly. Anduin thought about Baine's report of the incident. "I don't know what to believe," he said finally. "But I do know how my advisers-and most of the Alliance-feel about her. She's the enemy. But she's not devoid of the ability to care about one thing, if nothing else." Calia looked a bit confused, but Faol's eyes were bright with understanding. "I think I see where you're going with this, my boy." "She cares about the Forsaken, people she views as her children. And the Alliance cares about their fallen loved ones." Faol's glowing eyes widened, but it was Calia who spoke first. "You're saying that the Alliance was devastated after Lordaeron because so many of their loved ones were killed-or turned into the
Scourge. It was personal loss." She paused. "Like mine." Anduin nodded. "Yes," he said quietly. "And they've come to believe that the Forsaken are undead monsters. To most of my people, they're no better than the Scourge. But you know better. You found hope and help from a Forsaken who had been a friend in life and was still a friend in death." But Faol was shaking his head. "You and Calia are remarkable individuals, Anduin," he said. "I'm not sure your average human would be able to make the leaps the two of you have." "That's because they haven't had the chance to," Anduin insisted. "Calia was rescued by someone she knew and trusted, someone who didn't let her down. At Garrosh Hellscream's trial, the Vision of Time showed me another courageous Forsaken-Frandis Farley. There's a Fredrik Farley who's the innkeeper in Goldshire. They could be relatives. I wonder if Fredrik would like to know that Frandis died resisting a cruel and unfair leader. I'd like to think he would." He leaned forward, speaking from his heart. "There have to be so many stories, Faol. So many. Lordaeron and Stormwind were more than political allies; they were friends. People traveled easily and freely throughout the kingdoms. There have to be relatives who mourn their loved ones as dead when in reality they're still-" The king paused, realizing what he was about to say. Faol smiled sadly. "Alive?" The archbishop shook his head. "It's probably a mercy they think them dead. Too many can't shake their prejudice to even try to see us as we really are." "What if they did try?" Anduin leaned forward in his seat. "What if some of them were open to the idea? To meet their loved ones who've been...changed, yes, but still who they were? Isn't that better than their being truly dead?" "Not for a great majority, it isn't." "We don't need a majority to begin. Look at Calia. Look at me. We just need some. We need a spark of understanding, of acceptance. That's all. Just a single spark."
His voice trembled as he said it, and he felt the Light wash through him with its sweet, warm blessing. Anduin knew he was speaking a great truth. One that would require effort and nurturing, but one that could indeed catch fire and sweep through the world. And when it did, nothing would be the same. "I think he's right," Calia said. Her voice was stronger than it had been since the conversation had begun. There was color in her cheeks, enthusiasm in her face. She was lit from within, as he was, by the breathtakingly daring act of hope. Calia turned to her friend. "I was lost, Alonsus. Emotionally and physically and mentally. You brought me back from a very dark place. What other wonders could that again work? For both Forsaken and humanity?" "I have seen much darkness," Faol said, and for once he was not warm and quietly mirthful. He was serious, and the lights in his eyes glowed a different shade as he spoke. "Much, much darkness. There is evil in this world, my young friends, and sometimes it does not require corruption from an outside source to thrive. Sometimes it is born in the hearts of the least likely seeming people. A tiny seed of resentment or fear finds fertile soil and blooms into something terrible." "But isn't the reverse also true?" Anduin pressed. "Can't a tiny seed of hope or kindness find fertile soil as well?" "Of course it can, but you are not talking about a tiny seed," Faol said. "First, the only Forsaken you know of who would support such a thing are myself and a few here in the Conclave. There may not be many others who would. And if there are, you then must work with the leader of the Horde-the Banshee Queen. She may not want her people thinking fondly of their time as living beings. And finally, are there any humans other than Calia who would even wish to meet their, er, stillexisting relatives or friends?" At Anduin's crestfallen expression, the Forsaken archbishop softened. "I'm sorry to discourage you. But a ruler-even a priestly one -must know all the obstacles in his path. You want what is right, Anduin Llane Wrynn. And it is my fervent hope that this idea of yours
will come to fruition. But perhaps that hour is not now." Anduin didn't quite slump, but he wanted to. He ran a hand through his hair and sighed. "You may be right. But it's a chance to reunite families. To get us all working together so that we're not focused on trying to kill each other. It's a chance to stop the harm to Azeroth. This is important on so many levels!" "I didn't say I disagreed with that." Faol fell silent for a moment, thinking. "I'll tell you what. I'll talk with the rest of the Forsaken priests and get their opinions. We can begin to lay the groundwork for this." The young king brightened somewhat. "Yes. That's probably the best way to proceed for now. But lulls in aggression between Alliance and Horde seem to be rare. I had hoped to make the most of-" "Your Majesty?" Anduin turned to see High Priestess Laurena. Her normally friendly visage held an expression of concern, and her voice was somber. Anduin went cold inside. "What's wrong?" "It's Wyll. I think you'd better come back. Immediately."
Genn was there to meet Anduin and Laurena as they stepped through the portal. The look in the older man's eyes was like a cold hand around Anduin's heart. "Your Majesty," he began. "Is he...?" "No, no. Not yet. I'm no healer, but I think it won't be long now." Anduin shook his head. No. There was still time. The Light was with him. "I won't accept that," he said, almost biting off the words as he raced toward the servants' wing. "Anduin," Genn called after him. But the young king wouldn't listen. Aerin. Bolvar. His father. He'd lost too many he'd cared about. He wasn't going to lose Wyll. Not today. As was proper for someone with so high a standing in the household, Wyll had a fairly large room. It was impeccably tidy, like the man himself. There was a washstand with a spotless basin, mirror, and shaving supplies along with a wardrobe, a clothing trunk, and a comfortable chair for reading. A mug of tea and a small bowl of nowcold cooked grains sat on a table next to it.
The only reason the bed wasn't perfectly made was that Wyll was in it. Anduin's heart lurched painfully. Wyll would never say how old he was, but Anduin knew that he'd tended the young Varian Wrynn and he'd hinted that he might even have served Llane Wrynn, Anduin's grandfather, when he, too, was young. But in Anduin's mind, Wyll was ageless. He had been old ever since the king could remember, but he'd always had the energy to keep up with his young charge. Now, as Anduin regarded the figure lying in the bed, he felt as though all of Wyll's years had descended upon him at once. His normally ruddy face was pale, and his high cheekbones that had always made him look distinguished now only emphasized the sunken cheeks. He remembered noticing that Wyll had been losing weight even before they had traveled to Ironforge. He had thought nothing of it then. But it was as if the weight had simply melted off his tall frame. He looked diminished, smaller. Frail. Anduin felt a sudden, shameful flush of guilt. "Wyll," he said, and his voice cracked. The old man's eyelids, paper-thin and blue-veined, fluttered open. "Ah," he said, his voice reedy. "Your Majesty. Please forgive me if I don't rise. I told them not to disturb you." Anduin grabbed the chair and pulled it over to Wyll's bedside, reaching for the gnarled hand. "Nonsense," he said. "I'm glad they did. You'll be fine in just a moment. Wyll, you've been there for me for as long as I can remember. Anticipating my wants and needs as if by magic. You've taken care of me all my life. Now let me take care of you." He took a deep breath and asked for the Light. At once his hand grew warm. But to his shock, Wyll made a soft noise of protest and drew his hand back. "Please...no. That won't be necessary." Anduin stared at him. "Wyll...I can heal you. The Light-" "Is a lovely and beautiful thing. And it loves you, my boy. Just as your father did. Just as I do. But I think it's time I was on my way." Anduin's stomach clenched. He knew he couldn't restore the old
man's youth. Although he did not think that such was beyond the Light's power, if such a thing were possible, it was not granted to priests or others who used the Light to heal. But Anduin could cure whatever sickness was sucking the life out of his old friend. He could remove aches and pains and stiffness. Wyll had, albeit with reluctance, permitted him to do similar things in the past. Why was he refusing aid now, when it counted more than ever before? "Please. I...need you, Wyll," Anduin said. It was selfish, but it was true. "No, you don't, Your Majesty," Wyll said very gently. "You're all grown up now into a fine young man. You need a valet, not a child's servant. I've made a list over there of fellows I can recommend." Wyll turned his white head and pointed with an unsteady finger. Sure enough, on the little table, there was a rolled-up scroll lying next to a book. Anduin noticed there was a bookmark inserted threequarters of the way through. He seized on this and said, "But your book...you're not done with your story." Wyll chuckled, wheezing. "Oh," he managed, "my story's finished, I'm afraid. And it's been a fine one, if I do say so myself. I've gotten to serve under three kings-good ones. Fair ones. One who needed a bit of guiding, to be sure. And don't worry, I'm not talking about you, my boy. I've had a purpose, and true love, and just enough danger to make things interesting." He turned his watery eyes on Anduin. "But I'm tired, dear boy. I'm very, very tired. I've lived long enough, I think. The Light's got far better things to do with itself than to heal cranky old men who've lived long, full lives." No, Anduin thought. No, I don't think it does. "Please let me help you," he said, trying one last time. "I'm just starting my reign. And I've lost so much. So many." "I've lost everyone," Wyll said almost conversationally. Anduin knew that the elderly man was not upbraiding him, but even so, he felt heat rise in his face. "Your grandparents. Your parents. My brothers and sisters and nieces and nephews. All my old friends. And my beloved
Elsie. They're all waiting for me. Can't quite see them yet, but I will. It would be a grand thing to move with no aches and pains, I'll admit that. But it's going to be a grander thing to set all these burdens down and be with those I loved." Anduin couldn't think of anything to say. He wondered what it was that was finally taking Wyll away. An illness? He could purge it. A weak heart or another failing organ? He could repair it. He could, but had been forbidden to. His eyes stung. Wyll gently laid a hand on Anduin's arm. "It's all right," he said. "You are going to be a wonderful king, Anduin Llane Wrynn. One for the history books." Anduin covered the hand with his own. He did not call on the Light. He would respect the wishes of this good man who had served the royal family his whole life. "I'd be a better one with you making sure my crown sat just right on my head," he said, recalling his trip to Ironforge a few years earlier, when Wyll had taken a good fifteen minutes arranging the prince's circlet. "Oh, you'll figure that out," Wyll said. "Wyll," Anduin said gently. "Will you let me ease your pain, at least?" The old servant-the old friend-nodded. Grateful for even this little chance to help, to make at least some feeble attempt to repay Wyll for all he had done, Anduin asked the Light for that and only that. A soft radiance limned his hand. The illumination traveled quickly to Wyll's hand, then raced along his body for a few seconds, flaring brightly before it faded. "Oh, yes, that's quite nice," Wyll said. He looked better. Not quite so pale, and breathing seemed to come easier to him as his chest rose and fell evenly. But Anduin's own chest was tight with grief. "What else can I do? Something to eat, perhaps? I hear the chef has perfected some pastries." Wyll was as bad as any six-year-old child when it came to sweets. "No, I don't think so," Wyll said. "I think I'm done with that now.
Thank you, though, Your Maj-" "Anduin." His voice broke. "I'm just Anduin." "You're good to an old man, Anduin. I shouldn't keep you. Please don't berate yourself for this. Nothing is more natural than what I'll be doing shortly." "I'd like to stay if you'll let me." Wyll eyed him. "I'd not cause you any more pain than I have to, dear boy." Anduin shook his head. "No. You won't." It wasn't a lie. Not quite. Losing Wyll would be devastating whether Anduin was present or not. But at least if he was here when the old man breathed his last, Anduin would know he had done all he could. He had been denied the chance to be with his father when Varian died. They had embraced when the king left, and their words to each other had been kind. But Varian had fallen alone save for the presence of demons and his killer, and not even his body could be recovered. Wyll had earned the right to have someone with him at the end. He had earned it a thousand times over. "How about I read you the rest of the book?" Anduin said. "That would be very pleasant," Wyll said. "Do you remember that I taught you to read?" Anduin did. The memory made him smile. "I used to get upset when you would correct my pronunciation," he recalled. "No, not really. You were a very mild-tempered child. You just got frustrated. There's a difference." A lump wedged itself in Anduin's throat. He hoped he could read past it. He owed Wyll that much, at least. "All right. We'll read. Let me get you some water." He stepped outside to call for someone and found Genn pacing in the hall. "How is he?" Greymane asked quietly. Anduin couldn't speak and took a moment to compose himself. "He's dying," he replied. "He won't let me heal him."
"He told the same thing to High Priestess Laurena when I called her in to look at him," Genn said. "What? Genn, why didn't you tell me?" Genn looked at him levelly. "Would it have made any difference to you?" Anduin sagged. "No," he said. "I'd have asked him to let me try regardless." Genn reached out and squeezed Anduin's shoulder. "For what it's worth, I'm sorry. And it's his choice. You can't save everyone." "It feels like I can't save anyone," Anduin said. "I know that feeling, too," Greymane said. Anduin thought about what the other king had endured and knew it to be true. Only a few refugees had escaped Gilneas, and it was only through the night elves' kindness that they had survived at all. The young king nodded, his heart as heavy as lead inside his chest. He took a deep breath. "I'm going to read to him for a while. Would you mind having someone bring some water and cups?" Genn seemed about to speak, then nodded. "Of course. Would you like someone to stay with you?" "No. I'm fine. I just...well. If there's an emergency, you know where to find me. I think it will be soon." The older man nodded sympathetically. "I'll station someone outside just in case. You're doing a good thing, my boy." "I wish I believed that." "When you are Wyll's age or mine, you will."
-
The next few hours slipped by. Wyll had perked up for a bit and accepted some water, though he wouldn't allow Anduin to fuss too much over him. He listened to the book, which was a history about the Dragon Aspects, and initially made a comment or two. Then he spoke less and less, and finally Anduin realized the old man had drifted off to sleep.
Or had he- As Anduin leaned forward to make sure Wyll's chest was still moving, Wyll's eyes flew open. Anduin realized at once that Wyll was looking at something the king couldn't see. "Papa," Wyll murmured. "Mama..." Anduin put the book down and took the old man's hand. How thin the skin was, how twisted the fingers, like a tree's roots. Yet up until his last few days, Wyll had completed his duties. Anduin's eyes stung again as he envisioned those hands performing with difficulty things he himself could do so easily. How had he not noticed this? I'm so sorry, Wyll. I didn't want to see. Then, suddenly, Wyll grew querulous. "But...where's my Elsie? You had to have died, dearest. If you'd survived the Scourge, you'd have found a way to come to me. Elsie, where are you?" His arm extended, reaching for his phantom wife. "I can't find my way without you!" Anduin's heart was breaking. Gently, he called the Light and placed his radiant hand on the old man's now clammy brow. "Shh," he said softly. "Be at peace. You'll find each other, old friend. You will. When the time is right. But now rest." Wyll blinked rapidly, frowning a little, and when he turned to Anduin, it looked as though he did recognize his charge. "Anduin? You're here, too?" "Yes, it's me. I'm here. I won't leave you." Wyll settled back down, closing his eyes. "You were such a good boy. It was a joy taking care of-" He broke off in midsentence. Anduin bit his lower lip. Then the old man rallied. "Tell her I always loved only her. My little Elsie with the fire-red hair. If you see her. Tell her I'll wait for her." Tears stung the king's eyes. "Of course I'll tell her. I promise." He swallowed hard. "You go on now." "I think I will. It's really quite beautiful," Wyll sighed. "Thank you for not keeping me."
Anduin started to say something but then closed his mouth. He could feel the old man's pulse slowing...slowing...heard a soft sigh from the bed. Slow...slow... Stop.
Genn was waiting for Anduin outside the door. When the king emerged, Genn looked at him with eyes that held far too many sorrows. "I'm all right," Anduin said. It wasn't quite true, but he had a purpose now, and that helped. "I need you to do something for me." "Of course. What do you need, my boy?" "Please ask High Priestess Laurena to prepare Wyll's body for burial with all rites due to so close a friend of the Wrynn family. Then tell my advisers to meet me in the map room within two hours. Notify High Exarch Turalyon and Alleria Windrunner that I desire their attendance as well." Genn's bushy eyebrows rose at that, but he stopped just short of asking why. Instead he said, "You don't need to do anything just yet, you know. Your head-" "Is clear," Anduin replied. "But I thank you for your concern. I'll be in my quarters preparing for the meeting." He turned and strode off before Genn could continue to press him. He had been alone with Wyll's body and his own pain for an hour
before emerging, and the first wave of grief had crested and receded. Now he needed to focus. Anduin spent the hours before the meeting writing furiously and consulting various tomes, then said a quick prayer to calm himself and went to meet his advisers in the map room. Everyone he had requested was there: Genn Greymane, Mathias Shaw, Catherine Rogers, Alleria Windrunner, and Turalyon. Even Velen had traveled from the Exodar to be present. When Anduin informed them of his plans, only Velen stood with him. Rogers, of course, was no surprise. "Have you been to Southshore recently?" she snapped rhetorically. "The very creature you're negotiating with deliberately unleashed the blight against an Alliance town! I had friends-family-there. Now there's only Forsaken." "The Forsaken are not the Scourge," Anduin reminded her. "Some of them retain a sense of who they were, and they miss their living relatives." "I can't believe them capable of such things," Catherine retorted. Anduin turned to Shaw. "Spymaster?" he asked calmly. Shaw nodded. "His Majesty is correct. A short while ago, he asked me to send extra agents to the Undercity. A governing body has sprung up in Sylvanas's absence. They call themselves the Desolate Council. I have reason to believe that the king's proposal of a gathering would be extremely well received among this number. But they do not represent the majority of the Forsaken." Rogers looked stunned. Anduin took a step toward her, beseeching her. "Catherine...your family and friends...they could be among the council." For a moment, he saw something soft flit across the sky admiral's face. Then her jaw tightened, and that face grew harder than he had ever seen it. "They are dead." She all but spit the words. "Worse than dead- monsters. How can you possibly imagine I'd want to see them as they are now?" "Remember, Sky Admiral," Anduin said, his voice still kind, "you
speak to your king." All the color that had fled her face rushed back. She bowed immediately. "My apologies, Your Majesty, if I've given offense. But the shambling wrecks of my loved ones are the last thing I would ever want to see. I'd prefer to remember them as they were. Alive, healthy, happy...and human." "No offense was taken, Admiral," Anduin replied. "And your point is understandable. King Greymane?" "You know my thoughts on Forsaken," Genn growled. His voice was so rough and deep, the older king might as well have been in his worgen form. "I agree with the admiral. They're monsters. If we care at all for our Forsaken relatives, we should be trying to give them true deaths, not embrace what they've become." Anduin's heart sunk further with each opinion voiced. "Reunions can often be disappointing," Alleria said bluntly. "You may not know, but recently Vereesa and I met with Sylvanas. It...did not go well." "No, I didn't know," Anduin said, strain creeping into his voice. He thought about his words to Valeera: It seems each passing day reduces the number of people I can rely on. "Perhaps you would care to enlighten me." "We met only to see what was left of our family ties," she said. "I will tell you more if you wish. But suffice it to say that I would not put my faith in her, Anduin Wrynn. She has been too long in the darkness, and it has eaten away what is left of the sister I loved so dearly." Her voice was strong, yet it quivered slightly. Despite all that had happened to her, despite her worrisome familiarity with the Void, it was obvious to Anduin that she was still capable of deep love. She was still Alleria. And the failure of the reunion of the three sisters had wounded her. It did not bode well for his plan to convince this group of the power of familial bonds. "Nor would I trust the rot-riddled brains of the Forsaken to be able to distinguish friend from foe if they came face to face with their erstwhile loved ones," Alleria continued. "I would advise against this path."
"As would I," said Turalyon, startling Anduin. More than most, the paladin understood the power of the Light and how it could change minds and hearts. He had even befriended and fought alongside a demon who had been infused with the Light. "I ask you as a tactician: Do you really wish to risk failure? You could start a war. If even one of the Forsaken snaps and kills an Alliance member-" "Hell," boomed Genn, "if one of the Alliance members sneezes too loudly, we'd have war. It's too risky, Your Majesty." He calmed himself before continuing in a quieter voice. "Light knows your heart's in the right place. And it's a bigger, more generous heart than mine. But you have to be a good king as well as a good man." Valeera had said something similar. Anduin knew the truth of the words, yet he also had to be true to himself. Genn continued. "We have more than enough to keep us occupied and sleepless at night with goblins, Azerite, and a damaged world. Let's not start a conventional war over, what-a total of a few dozen individuals? We gain so little and stand to lose so much." "We stand to gain peace," came Velen's quiet voice. "The actions of a few dozen...people," and Rogers pronounced the last word in a slightly strangled tone, "don't determine peace." "No," Anduin said. "Not in that moment, perhaps. But over time. If this goes well-" "If," Greymane emphasized. Anduin shot him a sharp look. "If this goes well," he repeated, adding, "and I believe it will, this could plant a seed. If these few people can find common ground, why not a hundred, or a thousand, or ten thousand, or more?" Aware that negative emotions were running high and threatening to overshadow other factors, he tried appealing to their tactical minds. "Why would Sylvanas openly start a war? She's got much to lose and little to gain. The Horde is preoccupied with the same concerns that face the Alliance: how to recover from the devastating war with the Legion. How to heal Azeroth and how to keep Azerite from falling into the hands of the opposition. Do you think she wants to fight another
open war with all that going on?" "There's always a plan with that banshee," Genn said. "She's always steps ahead of us." "Then let us work out the same steps ourselves. In no scenario does open warfare work to either the advantage of the Horde or that of the Alliance." "That we know of," Alleria said. "And there is much none of us knows about Sylvanas and how she thinks." "Is there anyone present who thinks she would wish to see harm come to the Forsaken?" Anduin challenged. There was silence. "The Forsaken are her people. Her creations. Her children in a way. We've seen mountains of evidence that she is trying to save them, to find means to prolong their existences." "As I've said before, she wants to make more of them by killing us," Genn said. "What if she thinks these humans might be amenable to becoming Forsaken themselves? They could be with their loved ones forever that way." "So she could kill our people, recruit a couple dozen new Forsaken- and immediately enter a war. That's an excellent tactic." Anduin tried, but he couldn't quite keep the sarcasm out of his voice. Genn fell unhappily silent. Anduin looked at them one by one. "I'm aware that this could backfire. The Forsaken could find themselves envious of the living, which could solidify a moderate attitude into a zealous one. The same could be said of the Alliance side. They may find themselves repulsed by people they once loved and become more determined than ever to destroy the Forsaken. But I believe they deserve the chance to find out. Both the humans and the Forsaken." The hawks in the group stood with their arms folded and their lips pressed together. It was clear to them that Anduin's mind was made up. Even though they outnumbered him four to two-Shaw seemed to take no side-they knew this encounter would proceed. Genn tried one final time. "I think the others need to know what I do," he said, not unkindly. "That you lost your oldest friend just a few
hours ago. You told me Wyll had wanted to see his wife, who died at Lordaeron. You're doing this for him, and I understand why you want to. But you can't put innocent lives at risk just to make yourself feel better." "You're partially right, Genn," Anduin said quietly. "I would be lying if I told you that I don't wish with all my heart that Wyll and Elsie had been able to see each other again. It's too late for Wyll, but it's not too late for others." He placed his hands on the map table and leaned forward. "If Sylvanas responds with terms that are acceptable to me-terms that I believe will adequately protect Stormwind citizens-this meeting will take place. I expect all of you to accept that and turn your attention to following my orders to ensure that everything goes according to plan. Do I make myself clear?" Nods and a few murmured "Yes, Your Majestys" went around the table. "Good. Now let's start our preparation."
Sapphronetta Flivvers awoke to pain. The gnome was bruised and battered, and her hands and feet were securely tied. She flexed them, noting that she still had good circulation, and began to assess her current situation. It wasn't promising. She was lying facedown across something warm, and she could feel muscles tensing and contracting beneath her and hear the slow flap of wings. Gryphon? No; feathered wings sounded different when they beat. Wyvern. She had known her team would be targeted. That was why they had beefed up the security. Saffy felt an awful pang for her friends and for the Sentinels who had been assigned to help them. That an attack had come was hardly a shock. But why had she been allowed to survive? The Horde, of course, wasn't fond of any of the Alliance races, but they had little use in particular for gnomes. Yet here she was, not just spared but taken. Kidnapped! She tried to recall the exact words she'd heard: Kezzig, that's a gnome lady! Yeah, and I'm gonna punch the living-oh. Maybe she's not the
right one. She fits the description perfectly. You know the rules. Yeah, yeah, stupid rules. They had come to kill the Explorers' League members and their protectors; that much was obvious. They hadn't been looking for her but for someone who looked like her, and they wanted the "gnome lady" alive. If she could just figure out what they were after, she might be able to bluff her way to safety-and a chance to escape. Saffy couldn't feel the comfortably familiar, pleasant weight of her massive tool belt. Obviously, they'd taken that. It was a shame they'd put ropes on her instead of locked chains, because she was pretty sure they hadn't removed her hairpins. There was nothing she could use as a weapon, and someone had to be sitting near her to make sure the gnome they'd gone to all this effort to abduct wouldn't fall off in midflight. Urf. Now there was a thought. Saffy stopped even her slight squirming and lay still, thinking furiously. They'd have to land, and they'd have to take her out of the sack in which they'd thrown her. They must want something from her or whoever they thought she was, but she couldn't imagine... Oh, wait. Yes, she could. She could imagine it all too well. They'd been in Silithus, and they knew there were goblins out in force. Goblin activity meant one of two things: profit or technology. Well, all right, three things: profit, technology, or mining. Well, no: profit, technology, mining, or pummeling people. And goblins also meant... Oh, come on, Saffy, she told herself. There are a lot of goblins in the world. The odds of what you're thinking are approximately 5,233,482 to 1. Someone would have to know your location, and- Oh, dear. They didn't have to know her location. They were kidnapping every "gnome lady" they came across who fit the description. The wyvern landed with a thump. Saffy started to slide off and couldn't suppress a gasp. Then the bag that encased her was abruptly
dragged off the mount, and Saffy let out an oof as she was flung onto a bony shoulder. She heard whirring, buzzing, beeping sounds and muffled conversation in, as expected, Goblin. A language she'd picked up long ago, when she had been young and innocent and- Stupid. Come on, admit it, Saffy. Stupid. She couldn't quite make out most of what they were saying, but she caught enough: ...dead...take her...better be worth...know what to do. Her heart sped up. No. It couldn't be. The odds were- She was dropped unceremoniously on the floor. "She better be okay," came a voice from Saffy's past. A voice attached to a goblin she despised with every fiber of her being. A goblin she had hoped to never have to lay eyes on for the rest of her life. She should stay quiet. Not give him any gratification. Pretend to cooperate with whatever dastardly, despicable scheme he was plotting. The bag was opened, and she blinked, momentarily blinded by the light. Rough hands grabbed her arms and held her down as a knife sawed through her ropes. Then she was hauled to her feet. "Hey, hey, what did you do to her?" came the loathed voice. "Her face is all-" With a roar of fury stoked by years of simmering resentment, Saffy managed to wrest free of the two bruisers on either side and launch herself like a mini-rocket, complete with fiery red hair, at her archenemy. The symbol of misery, frustration, and rage. She had the satisfaction of watching his tiny eyes widen in shocked horror and his big knobby hands come up toward his face. "You lying, manipulative, lazy, horrible, no-good, filthy wretch!" Saffy shouted, her hands, fingers formed into claws, outstretched to scratch his eyes out. Tragically, the bruisers got her just before she was able to scratch eight perfect furrows in that ugly green face. A rag coated with who
knew what foul material was shoved into her mouth, and she was trussed up again. Could she ever learn to get her temper under control? Apparently not. Then again, this was Grizzek. He deserved everything she could throw at him. Just the thought made her squirm with impotent fury. "You change your mind, we'll take care of her," the biggest, burliest one said. "No need, Druz," the loathed coward said. "You guys scram. I got this." Saffy continued to squirm as Grizzek showed the bruisers out. "Hello, Saffy! Hello, Saffy!" He couldn't have-but he had. There it was, the beautiful, exquisite parrot she had created. Oh, if she could just get free for two minutes- "I'm sorry they hurt you. They weren't supposed to." "Mmmphh mhphfmpp oo?" she repeated incredulously, and then launched into a string of beautiful but sadly unintelligible cursing. "Funny thing is, that group wasn't even looking for you. They were after your friends. I-I'm sorry about that, too, kid." But you're not sorry you had me kidnapped! she tried to say. All that emerged was more muffled noises. "No, I'm not sorry about that. Besides," he said, shaking his head, those big ugly ears flapping slightly with the motion, "crazy as it sounds, I think by the time all this is over, you're not gonna be sorry either." He winced at her denials this time. "You keep on like that, you're not gonna have any voice left." He paused. "Which, all things considered, might not be a bad idea." She bit down on the terrible-tasting rag, her eyes shooting daggers at him. After her breathing calmed down a bit, Grizzek came over and untied the gag, keeping his big fingers away from Saffy's sharp little teeth. They glared at each other. "Aw, Saffy. I gotta say, it's good to see you again."
"The pleasure is all yours," Saffy snapped. "Miss me?" "Yes. Repeatedly. As you recall, my Lightning Blast 3000 failed every time I took aim." "I told you that piece of crap wouldn't work." "Aww, honey, I hate you, too. Tell you what," the gnome said, "you untie me, give me food and water and my parrot back, and I'll head out and not report you to the authorities." Of course, she would. In a Gadgetzan minute, she would. Assuming there were any "authorities," wherever they were. "Can't do that, Punkin," he said, shaking his head. "And it's not your parrot." "It is so my parrot!" "Nope, we made him together. C'mon," he said, almost looking hurt, "you gotta remember that. It was our first anniversary present to each other." It had also been their last. Saffy didn't want to think how crazy in love she had been with the green mook. Well, she amended, just plain crazy, at least. "Besides. Just hold on to your hat here for a minute and you'll understand." "Your goons took my hat!" she shouted after him as he wandered out. Her beautiful pith helmet, given to her expressly for this mission. "They're not my goons," he said. "They'd never have hurt ya if they'd been my goons. Or your pals. You know I don't work that way, Punkin." "Don't call me that!" She strained against the ropes with all the strength in her small body, but the knots were good. Of course the knots were good. We're in Tanaris, by the ocean. Everyone's a sailor. Even the goons. She was thirsty, hungry, overheated, sunburned, and exhausted, and she slumped against her bonds. "Here," Grizzek said almost gently, and took one of the hands that
were bound behind her back. Saffy twitched angrily, but he pressed something into her palm and closed her fingers over it. She gasped once. The pain on her sunburned, bruised face eased. Her mouth was no longer dry nor did her stomach rumble for food. She felt alert, strong, sharp. Her gaze fell on the parrot. "There's about five different things I can do to improve Feathers if you'll just give me an arclight spanner, three sets of nuts and bolts, and a good screwdriver," she announced. And then blinked. How had she known that? Grizzek released her hand. She kept her fist tightly closed around... whatever it was he had pressed against her palm. He moved around behind her, sitting in the single chair, watching her reaction. "It's something, ain't it?" he said, his voice soft and filled with reverence. "Yeah," she breathed, as awestruck as he was. Silence stretched between them. Then, finally, Saffy asked, "What is it?" "Boss says it's called Azerite," Grizzek said. Azerite! The very substance she'd been brought into that awful desert to analyze. Now Saffy understood why. Her brain was on fire but calm, not frantic. This stuff was amazing. "Actually, what the boss really calls it is 'My Path to Ruling Azeroth with Lots of Statues to Glorious Me.' " Saffy abruptly recalled one of the things he'd said to her while she was shouting and struggling to escape. They're not my goons, he had said. Which meant that they were someone else's goons. Which meant... "Oh, Grizzek," she said, horrified. "Please tell me you aren't working with that ugly green monster with the terrible fashion sense!" She paused. "That could apply to lots of goblins, actually. What I meant to ask was-" "I know what you meant," he said, lowering his head and not meeting her eyes. "Or, rather, who you meant. And yeah."
"Jastor Gallywix?" He nodded miserably. "I don't think I've ever been more disappointed in you. And that's saying something." "Look. He came to me with this stuff. You got a taste of what it can do. He's agreed to let me decide what I do, what I make, and most important, how it's used. And he's given me everything I've asked for supply-wise in order to understand it, refine it, and make amazing, fantastical inventions with it." "Everything, huh? I guess that explains why you had me kidnapped." "Punkin, I-" She shook her head. "No. I get it. I..." She gulped. Swallowing her pride was hard. "I might have done the same. Might have. Probably not. But I might have." His eyes widened in an expression of gratitude, and his ears drooped ever so slightly with relief. "So...you'll help me?" "I'll help you." "Aw, Punkin, we made a hell of a team back when," he said. She smiled. "Yeah. We did. Too bad we got married and ruined all that." "Well, we ain't married now, so I say, let's get to work." "You have to untie me first." "Oh? Yeah, right, sure." He slipped off the chair, reaching for a knife with one hand, and hurried behind her. Her bonds were cut free for the second time that morning. Belatedly, he paused. "You...you mean it, right? You're not going to clonk me with something and run off with Feathers?" The thought had occurred to her, but Saffy didn't volunteer that bit of information. No, she was in this for the long haul. Anything that could do what this Azerite could do was something she wanted a part in developing. What vehicles, what gadgets and trinkets, what contraptions they could create!
"No. I won't do that." She got to her feet as easily as if she hadn't spent far too long in a burlap sack being shunted across a continent. "But I do have one condition." "Anything!" "When we're done, I get Feathers." He winced, then stuck out his hand. She opened up her tiny pink one, seeing the soft golden-blue gleam of Azerite, and then it was nestled between their two hands as they shook on it.
Vellcinda didn't miss sleep. She had not realized until after her death just how much time had been wasted with her eyes closed and her body still. There was an old saying, "Plenty of time for sleep in the grave," but she had found the reality to be exactly the opposite. She'd slept far too much when she lived: an entire third of that life, how remarkable. Now that she was a Forsaken, she had done all she could to make the most of what she, with what remained of the incorrigible optimism she'd had in life, firmly viewed as a second chance. She'd been a servant when she died. So of course, when Vellcinda "awoke" as a Forsaken, the first thing she did, as her mind gradually became accustomed to her new reality, was serve. It was what she knew best. She'd been kind and patient with those who had awoken terrified and disoriented and had helped to rebury those who had refused Lady Sylvanas's dark gift. Part of her understood the refusal. Who among them hadn't been confused and frightened to awaken to the sight of their own skin decaying? No one with half a brain left, that was who. And of course,
some of the poor things didn't have even half a brain. Vellcinda seemed to have been one of the fortunate ones who'd awoken with their minds completely intact, thank you very much, and had firmly resolved to put it to good use. She missed her husband, and upon awakening, she had wanted to seek him out. He had been in Stormwind, and Vellcinda had been in Lordaeron, visiting family, when she died. She had been in the castle when Arthas had returned. She'd hoped to catch a glimpse of the beloved paladin and his triumphant homecoming but had been stuck working in the kitchens as he marched through a rain of rose petals into the throne room. But she had been well within range of what unfolded immediately after Arthas committed both patricide and regicide with one thrust of an unhallowed sword. Her beloved had been spared that, and she was glad of it. Others told her that attempts to contact him would only lead to heartbreak for them both. He believed her dead, and in the end, Vellcinda had decided that it was better that way. He was a good, kind man. He deserved to find a living woman to love. Many other Forsaken, such as her friend and fellow Governor Parqual, seemed to miss their loved ones as much as she did. Others seemed lukewarm, and still others didn't care at all. Some were even... evil. What had happened, to her, to them, to have such differing personalities and mind-sets? It was one of the mysteries about being Forsaken. She had no memory of her time as a mindless creature, and that was a good thing. As the years unfolded, though, Vellcinda grew tired of serving. But her brain was almost as sharp as it had ever been, and Vellcinda began to want to learn, to achieve, rather than simply do for others. She directed her genuinely caring nature toward how best to take care of the, ah, unique challenges of being an active, sentient corpse. Injuries, for example. "Come now," she would say to the wounded, "Forsaken flesh won't heal itself, you know!" Stitching; grafting on new muscle, sinew, and
skin; and magical potions were the options open to her people instead of simply cleaning a wound, bandaging it, and trusting in the body's innate ability to repair itself. Time spent physically mending undead flesh eventually led to a desire to study with the apothecaries. Although Sylvanas put most of them to work on poisons, Vellcinda studied ways to keep the Forsaken active and healthy, mentally and physically. She noticed that some of the wounded appeared to be more afraid of dying now than they had been when they lived. As she inspected the fit of a new hand onto the right arm of a blacksmith-an accident with molten steel had made short work of his original one-he had said to her, "Always makes me nervous to come in here." "Why is that, dear?" Vellcinda hadn't been terribly old when she had died. A young sixty, she had always said. "I'm far less frightening than Doctor Halsey." The blacksmith, Tevan Whitfield, had chuckled, a raspy, hollow sound. "That's certainly true. No, I mean...when I was alive, I felt immortal. I didn't take care of myself, and I was a bit reckless. Now I am immortal, technically. But because injury is the only thing that can threaten that, I'm suddenly aware of how fragile flesh is." "Flesh has always been fragile." She inspected the hand. She'd sewn it on well. She noticed again that it didn't have calluses, nor were the muscles strong. The previous owner of the hand the blacksmith Tevan now wore probably had been some sort of artist or entertainer. She tapped the fleshy palm of the hand gently with her forefinger bones. "Can you feel that?" "Yes," he said. "Excellent." She regarded him levelly. "I must let you know that this hand won't be as strong as you're used to." "A few weeks of hammering will take care of that." Vellcinda gave him a compassionate look. "No, dear," she said gently, "it won't. You can't grow muscle anymore." His face fell. Not literally. His face hadn't decayed much at all. He was, in fact, rather handsome for a Forsaken.
"Come back if you can't use it properly," she said. "We'll see if we can't find a better one for you." She patted the hand gently. "You see?" Tevan had said. "This is what I'm talking about. In time, we'll just...wear ourselves away." "That's what happens in life, too," Vellcinda reminded him briskly. "We can't all be pretty, nigh-immortal things like elves. The proper attitude is that we must accept what we have and be grateful for it. You and I and the others are here. And that's a lovely thing. Nothing lasts forever, and if we die and can't come back, well, we've had a second chance, and that's more than many have had." Tevan smiled. With his intact face, it was a pleasant expression. Vellcinda had no false modesty about her own face, which was somewhat the worse for wear from being a lazy layabout in her grave for so long. She'd been plain even as a living, breathing human. Her husband had always said she was beautiful to him, though, and she believed him. That was what love was, wasn't it? Seeing with the heart and not the eyes and finding beauty there. "You're right," the blacksmith said. "I don't think I ever thought about it like that. I chose to receive the Gift. I know others didn't. At the time, I thought them fools. But now I wonder. I know Lady Sylvanas is trying to find ways that we can continue our existence. But what if we weren't meant to?" He gestured to his fine new noncallused hand. "How much should we do, how far should we go, just to keep existing?" Vellcinda had smiled. "Goodness, for a blacksmith, your thoughts are quite philosophical." "Maybe it's my new hand." Tevan had been the first with whom Vellcinda had conducted such discussion, but he would not be the last. Once the idea had come into her head, Vellcinda found she couldn't stop thinking about it. Now, months after that conversation, the leader of the Desolate Council stood in the throne room of the Undercity, in the spot where Sylvanas Windrunner had stood for so long until she had left to lead
the Horde. Beside Vellcinda on the top dais were the other four leading members of the governing council, who were called, simply and logically, the Governors. On the second step, just below them, were the seven known as the Ministers, who would implement the policies the Governors created. At the bottom were those who Vellcinda thought were actually the most important members of the council: the ten Listeners. Every day, they would meet and speak with those among the Forsaken who had questions, comments, or complaints about how the leadership governed. They reported directly to the Governors. Although any citizen of the Undercity was free to flag down any member of the council-including the Prime Governor, Vellcinda herself-the Listeners were more readily available. Thus far, things seemed to be going swimmingly. Vellcinda looked out over the calm crowd that filled the room to overflowing and continued outside. She was so very pleased. Today, more than ever, they needed to stand together, work together, for the betterment of everyone until their Dark Lady returned. Today they were holding a service for those Forsaken who had experienced their Last Death, fighting against the terrifying evil of the Burning Legion. Vellcinda had spoken with the Dark Lady's champion, Nathanos Blightcaller, on his recent visit to the Undercity and had implored him to persuade Sylvanas to return. "I know she has many responsibilities," she had told him. "But surely she can spend a few hours with us. Please, tell her to come for the ceremony we will be holding for those who willingly accepted death on behalf of the Horde. She doesn't have to stay long if her duties call her, but it would mean so much." Nathanos had said he would carry the message. But there had been no sign that Sylvanas would come. She waited a few moments longer just in case. The Forsaken in the crowd waited patiently, as they always did. Finally, their leader sighed. "I suppose you all want me to speak," Vellcinda said. "So I'll try to say a little something. Forgive me if I clear my throat a few times; we're all too familiar with that tickling of the ichor!"
That brought some laughter, raspy and guttural. Vellcinda continued. "I want to first acknowledge our friends who made the journey to be here today. I see blood elves, and trolls, and orcs, and even a few goblins and pandaren. Thank you for standing with us to honor those who fell from among our dwindling numbers. I'm particularly grateful for all the tauren out there. If not for you, we might all be extinct." There were representatives of all the Horde races there, but she saw more tauren than any other. It was thanks to the tauren that the Forsaken had been admitted into the Horde. Vellcinda shuddered to think about what would have happened to her people without that protection. "Even so, with the exception of our kind friends who stand here with us, I fear it is, sadly, accurate to say that many of the living still don't accept us. And these individuals seem to think that because we've already been dead, we don't really care about life, or whatever you choose to call our existence. They seem to think that we should suffer less when those of our numbers perish. Well, they're flat-out wrong. We do care. We do grieve. "Our queen is hunting for a way to increase our numbers by bringing back the fallen from the dead. Making more Forsaken. But what those of us assembled here today really wish from her is to know that she values the Forsaken she already has. Not just us as her people -which of course we are-but as individuals. To accept that some of us are content with just a second chance and might not want a third or a fourth but the Last Death instead. "We stand here today, thinking of those who did experience their Last Deaths. They are gone, utterly. Their blood doesn't flow in the veins of their children and on to generations-at least not generations who will ever live here and interact with us. Those Forsaken are lost, but they are also at peace. Reunited at last with those they loved in life. Let us honor their loss by never forgetting their names. Who they were. What they did." Vellcinda steeled herself. "I'll go first. On this day, I remember Tevan Whitfield. He was a blacksmith, and he once told me that he
was more afraid of death as a Forsaken than he had been as a living man. And yet when he was asked to serve, he did so. He made weapons that enabled others to fight the foe. He mended armor when it was damaged as we mend bodies when they are damaged. He faced his greatest fear and lost that gamble. I'll remember you always, Tevan. You were a good friend." She nodded to Parqual Fintallas, who stood beside her. He cleared his throat and began to speak of a woman who had been a warrior in life and in her undeath, until her body had been hacked to pieces by a fel reaver. The remembrances spread out like ripples from a pond. First from those who stood on the dais, then the Ministers, and then the Listeners. Then, one by one, members of the crowd, too, began to speak. So many of them had lost their families on that long-ago awful day, when Arthas had returned, that it was rare to see an intact one. Most Forsaken had made new families-unions made with those whom they had never known in life but who were just as important. As Vellcinda listened, holding her friend Tevan in her thoughts, she was sad, but she was content. All mourned, but no one wept. No one railed against injustice. But more important to her was that no one was angry. She had come to believe that anger wasn't good for the Forsaken. Many already weren't thinking too clearly, with their brains usually being rotten to some degree or other. As far as Vellcinda was concerned, rage just muddied the waters until no one could see where he or she was trying to swim. There were some in the Undercity who resented the role the Desolate Council had created for itself, but Vellcinda had been firm that it was only a stopgap measure. Supplies needed to be brought in. Replacement limbs had to be attached. "Gracious," Vellcinda had said once at a public meeting, "if our dear Sylvanas should step through that door, I'd be more than happy to say, 'Hello, Dark Lady, we've missed you terribly. Please do take over running this great city. It's a very wearying thing!' " As a servant, she had prepared meals, tended the sick, scrubbed bathtubs, and emptied chamber pots. She'd done what needed doing,
and as far as she was concerned, she'd much rather step back and let others who were better at leadership step up. She couldn't recall the last time she'd just sat and enjoyed watching the calming flow of the green canals. She returned to the present, chiding herself for woolgathering. When the last person had finished talking, she looked at the gathered crowd. "My, I'm so proud of all of you. And of those who gave all they had for the Horde. Thank you for coming." And that was it. The crowd dispersed, and she watched them go. She was disappointed that Sylvanas hadn't accepted the invitation to attend but it was not unexpected. "Prime Governor Vellcinda," came a calm voice. She turned, surprised and delighted. "Why, Champion Blightcaller," she said. "How good of you to come. I...don't suppose...?" He shook his head. "No. Our queen has urgent business to attend to. But," he added, "she has sent me to learn more about what is happening in her absence and to let you know that she does intend to visit shortly. She regrets that she was unable to be here today." "Oh, that is so kind of her! I'm pleased to hear that." She patted his arm. "I'm old enough to read between the lines, young man. Lady Sylvanas is afraid she has another Putress on her hands. But don't fret. We're just a group of concerned citizens, caretakers of a sort, minding the house while the mistress is gone. Why don't you come around for a visit this afternoon? We'll be happy to discuss what we're trying to do. Perhaps you would care for some tea?" Vellcinda liked to brew tea, to smell it, to hold the warm cup in her hands, even if she did not drink the beverage. He looked slightly baffled and opened his mouth to reply. But before he could do so, Vellcinda heard another voice. "Ah, precisely the fellow I have come here to meet. Well, not quite, but close enough." Vellcinda and Nathanos both turned to see a rather short Forsaken dressed in priest's robes. She didn't recognize him, but that wasn't surprising. The Undercity wasn't vast, but there were still a lot of
people here, not to mention all those who were simply passing through. "I've not had the pleasure," she said. The newcomer bowed. "Archbishop Alonsus Faol," he said. Vellcinda was surprised. It had been a well-known name not so long ago. She was pleased he had not perished with so many others. "Oh, my," she said. "It's an honor." Even Nathanos Blightcaller bowed to the archbishop. "Indeed it is. What is it you wish of me, sir?" "I have a letter. Actually, two. The first one is for your warchief. The second one is for someone named Elsie Benton." Vellcinda swayed slightly. Nathanos caught her arm, looking at her with concern, but she smiled and waved him off. "It's been a long time since I heard that name. Only my family and closest friends called me that." The archbishop's expression softened. "Then...here. Your letters." He handed each of them a tightly rolled scroll, and Vellcinda took hers with a trembling hand. Her eyes flew wide as she saw the wax stamp, which was blue, with the imprint of the lion of Stormwind. And she knew at once what it was. So did Nathanos. "This is from the king of Stormwind," he snapped, his red eyes blazing with anger as he turned to Faol. "What are you doing, fraternizing with an enemy of the Horde?" "But as I'm not a member of the Horde, the king is not my enemy," the archbishop said pleasantly. "I serve the Light. I'm a priest, and so is King Anduin. The letter is for your queen, and it's important. You should make sure that she sees it. But," he added, "it's not immediately dire. I suggest that you do as you had intended. Spend some time here in the Undercity. Take your thoughts and this missive back to the warchief. And you, dear lady..." Faol laid a gentle hand on her arm. "This missive, I am sorry to say, does contain bad news. I'm so very sorry." Vellcinda was glad of the warning as she broke the seal, opened the
scroll, and read:
To Elsie Benton, I do not even know if you still exist. But I feel compelled to ask Archbishop Faol to search for you while he is in the Undercity. If you are reading this, I assume his quest was successful. It is with the deepest sorrow that I must inform you that your husband, Wyll Benton, passed away peacefully this afternoon. I hope it comforts you to know he did not die alone; I was with him. Wyll served my father and me devotedly for many years. He did not speak to me of his family; I suspect it was too painful for him to recall those times and what he thought was your fate. He called out for you before he died and hoped to see you again. I follow the path of a priest, as you may know, and I pleaded with him to allow me to heal him. He refused, and I respected his wish. I have resolved to do all I can so that those who are Forsaken can reunite with their human friends and families, if only briefly. There are some things, I believe, that transcend the politics of kings and queens and generals. Family is one of them. To this end, I have sent a missive to your warchief. I hope she agrees with me. I close by fulfilling a promise asked of me by my friend Wyll: telling you that he always loved only you and that he will wait for you. Again, please accept my sincerest condolences.
And a signature in an elegant, educated hand: King Anduin Llane Wrynn. "My poor Wyll," Vellcinda said, her voice trembling. "Archbishop,
please thank King Anduin for me. I'm grateful my husband didn't die alone. No one should die alone. You tell the king that I think this is a fine plan. I hope our warchief does, too. I'd have been so glad to have seen Wyll one more time." "What plan?" Nathanos demanded, looking from Vellcinda to Faol suspiciously. "This," Vellcinda said, handing him the scroll. As Nathanos read, Faol said, "The outline for the king of Stormwind's proposition is clarified further in the scroll to be given to Warchief Sylvanas. I will be here for a few days, and I am happy to answer any questions you or Vellcinda might have." Looking displeased, Nathanos returned the missive. Clutching the precious scroll, the Prime Governor of the Desolate Council corrected Faol. "Elsie," she said. "I think it's time I went by Elsie again."
C
Lu, la lu, my dearest child, Lu, la lu, lu la lay, Lordaeron says, "Go to sleep." Azeroth says, "Dream you deep." Lu, la lu, la lu, la lay, Safe in my arms you'll stay.
alia sang softly to the dreaming child she held. This precious little one would one day be heir to the throne of Lordaeron. No. No, there was no Lordaeron, not anymore. There was only the Undercity, inhabited by the dead. Her father's crown had been broken and bloodied and now was lost to time. Calia would never wear it now. This drowsing, dreaming infant would never wear it, either. And that pained her. A single tear trickled down her face to land on the rosiest, softest cheek in the world. The child who was by all rights the trueborn heir to the throne blinked, the small mouth forming a pout. Calia lifted the bundle and kissed the tear away, tasting salt on her lips. And the baby laughed as her mother began once again to sing the
old, old lullaby, glancing up as her husband came in to kiss the top of his wife's head. He placed his hand on her shoulder, giving it a gentle squeeze- -the bony claw digging deep and- Calia screamed. She bolted upright, her heart slamming against her chest, gasping for breath. For an interminable, horrible instant, she could feel the pain of the undead hand that grabbed her. Then she blinked, and the horror retreated into memory. She buried her face in her hands, realizing it was wet with tears, and tried to still her shaking. It was only a memory. It wasn't real. But it had been, once. She slipped off the bed, reached for a robe, and then padded barefoot to Saa'ra. No matter what the hour, there was usually someone about in the Netherlight Temple. Someone was always coming in or heading out. Those who made this place their home knew of Calia's night terrors and had made it clear they were available at any time if she needed company or to talk. But she only ever wanted to speak to Saa'ra. The naaru was expecting her, as it always did. It hovered over her, a crystalline entity limned with luminous purple, and emitted a faint, ceaseless exquisite music. Saa'ra spoke sometimes in words that all could hear and sometimes directly and privately to someone's heart and head, as it did now. Dear one. I am so sorry the dream has troubled you once more. Calia nodded, sinking down in front of Saa'ra and twisting her fingers awkwardly. "I keep thinking that they will stop at some point." They will, the gentle being assured her. Once you are ready for them to stop. "So you've said. But why can't I be ready now?" She laughed a little, hearing the petulance in her own voice. There are things you must do before that peace will be granted to you. Things that you must understand, that you must integrate into
yourself. People who need your help. What one needs in order to heal will always come one's way, but sometimes it is hard to recognize it. Sometimes the most beautiful and important gifts come wrapped in pain and blood. "That's not making me feel better," Calia said. It might when you realize that all that has happened to you hides a gift within it. Calia closed her eyes. "Forgive me, but it's hard to think that way." The corruption of her beloved brother and the murder of her father, of so many of the people of Lordaeron...her flight, her terror...the loss of her husband and child, the loss of everything- No. Not everything. What we participate in, we can benefit from. For every fever you have cured, bone you have mended, life you have improved...that, and the joy that has come from that, is now as much a part of you as your pain. Honor them both, dear child of the Light. I would say trust that there is a purpose, but you already know there is. You have seen the fruits of your labor. Do not ignore them or belittle them. Taste them. Savor them. They are yours as much as anyone else's. Her tight chest eased as peace stole into her heart. Calia realized she'd been clenching her hands, and as she unfolded them, she saw small red crescents where her nails had dug into the flesh of her palm. She took a deep breath and closed her eyes. This time she did not see the horrors of her escape. Or, more difficult to endure, the sight of her daughter at play. She saw only darkness, tender and soft. It gentled what was too harsh to bear in the full radiance of light. It provided safety for wild creatures and privacy for those who wanted to create, just for a time, a world with only two. Calia felt Saa'ra's warmth brush her like the stroke of a feather. Sleep now, brave one. No more battles, no more horrors for you. Only peace and rest. "Thank you," Calia said, bowing her head. And as she padded back to her room, a hand on her arm, its flesh cool and unnaturally soft, made her pause. It was Elinor, one of the Forsaken priestesses.
"Calia?" she said. Calia wanted nothing more than to sleep. But she had vowed to always be there for those who needed her, and Elinor looked troubled. Her glowing eyes darted about, and her voice was pitched low. "What is it, Elinor? Is something wrong?" Elinor shook her head. "No. In fact, something might be going right for the first time in a long, long while. May we speak in private?" "Of course," Calia responded. She brought Elinor into her little alcove, and the two sat down on the bed. Once they were alone, Elinor needed no further urging to speak. The words tumbled from her leathery lips so quickly that Calia had to ask more than once for the Forsaken priestess to repeat herself. Calia's eyes widened as she listened, and her mind went back to what the naaru had told her: There are things you must do before that peace will be granted to you. Things that you must understand, that you must integrate into yourself. People who need your help. What one needs in order to heal will always come one's way, but sometimes it is hard to recognize it. Calia's eyes filled with tears, and she hugged her friend gently. Her heart felt full and hopeful for the first time since Lordaeron fell. She now had a purpose. Healing had come her way.
GALLYWIX PLEASURE PALACE, AZSHARA There were many places in Azeroth where Sylvanas Windrunner would prefer not to be. Gallywix's disgustingly named Pleasure Palace was not at the top of the list, but it was close. Once Azshara had been a beautiful land, full of open spaces and autumnal hues and opening out to the ocean. Then the goblins had joined the Horde under Garrosh, and they had defaced the region with their trademark garishness. The "palace" where she now sat in an overstuffed chair next to Jastor Gallywix had been hewn from a mountainside. The escarpment of the mountain had been turned into a literal "face" so that Gallywix's grotesque mien leered over the wreckage of the land below. The palace itself was even uglier, in Sylvanas's opinion. Outside was a vast green lawn with a course for some sort of game involving a small white ball, a huge pool with a heated area, and bartenders and waitresses currently standing idle save for those who attended to Gallywix. Inside was not much better. Tables groaned with food, much of which would never be eaten, and huge barrels served for decor. Upstairs was the trade prince's bedroom. Sylvanas heard it said that he slept on piles of money, and she was in no hurry to find out if those rumors were true. He'd been pleased to receive her message and kept offering drinks. She declined each time. While he indulged, she told him of the meeting at Thunder Bluff, omitting the delicate threat she had given Baine, of course. She would give Gallywix only the information he needed to know. "I trust that their efforts to heal the world will not damage your efforts to gather Azerite," she finished. Gallywix laughed, ginormous belly jiggling, and sipped his frothy, fruity beverage. "Nah, nah," he assured her, waving a big green hand. "They can have their little ceremonies. My operation is far too vast at this point to be impacted. And hey, if it keeps them happy, that's the
point, am I right?" Sylvanas ignored the comment. "Your operation thus far has not yielded much that I can use," she reminded him. "Relax," he said, "I got-" "People on it. Yes, I know." "No, seriously. I got the best minds I know of in a little place in Tanaris. Gave them a generous dollop of the golden goop. Told 'em to go nuts." He took another swig and smacked his lips. "And?" "And they're working on it." His gaze slid to the side. "What exactly are they working on?" "I, ah...told 'em they could do whatever they want. But you know scientists. They'll think of things you and I could never imagine. Best way to operate." "I want weapons, Gallywix." He downed his drink and waved for another. "Sure, sure, they'll have weapons for us." "I want them to focus on weapons. Or else I will send in every Forsaken, blood elf, tauren, troll, orc, and pandaren I can find and take over your 'operation.' Are we clear?" Sullenly, the trade prince nodded. Doubtless he knew she'd send her own people around to take the weapons that were made, whereas his scientists could craft other items he could sell on the side to make a tidy profit. A distraction for Gallywix came in the form of a hobgoblin who lumbered into the room and babbled something only his boss understood. "Of course, idiot," the goblin said. "Show Champion Blightcaller in at once!" Sylvanas thought she was almost as relieved as Gallywix at the interruption. Nathanos entered, gave Gallywix the barest minimum of a nod, and bowed to his queen. "My lady," he said, "forgive the intrusion, but I thought it best to bring you this missive immediately." He knelt before her and held out
a scroll. It was sealed with blue wax and stamped with the head of a lion. "Oho! I know that seal!" Gallywix exclaimed, then sipped his banana cocktail. Sylvanas knew it, too. She tore her gaze from the scroll and impaled the goblin with a cold stare. "You will excuse us," she said. He waited for a moment. When she continued to sit, raising a pale blonde eyebrow, Gallywix made a face and heaved himself out of his chair. "Take your time," he said. "I'll be in the hot tub if you want to join me when you're done with this fella." He waggled his eyebrows, then trundled out. "Heya, honeybunny, bring me a pineapple punch, will ya?" "Sure, boss!" a squeaky goblin female voice replied. Nathanos's red eyes were fixed on the trade prince's retreating form. "I will kill him," he said. "Oh, no. That pleasure will be all mine." Sylvanas got to her feet and gazed down at the scroll he held. "So. This is from Varian's whelp? Given to you at the Undercity?" Nathanos's face was unreadable. "Yes. Hand delivered to me by Archbishop Faol. He's now a Forsaken." Sylvanas let out a short, sharp bark of laughter at that. "His Light works in strange ways." "So it would seem." Sylvanas broke the seal and read.
Unto Queen Sylvanas Windrunner, Dark Lady of the Forsaken and Warchief of the Horde, King Anduin Llane Wrynn gives respectful greetings. I write to you with a proposition that has nothing to do with armies, territories, or goods, but it is one that I believe will serve both the Horde and the Alliance. I will cut directly to the heart of the matter. When you approached the Alliance, seeking a home for your people,
you were refused. We were still reeling in terror from what Arthas had done to Lordaeron and couldn't understand that your Forsaken were truly different. I have spoken recently with a Forsaken who was greatly respected in life and have learned that despite all he has endured, he still follows the Light. His name is Alonsus Faol, and he was once archbishop of Lordaeron. He has agreed to be a go-between in the interest of helping both the living and the undead. This missive is about families. Families that were torn apart not by Horde and Alliance but by Arthas, who rained despair and devastation upon all of us. Spouses, children, parents-so many separated, divided first by death, then by fear and anger. Perhaps, if we can work together, those driven apart can at last be reunited.
Sylvanas stiffened. Oh, yes. She, more than anyone, understood about divided families. Slain loved ones. She had lost everything because of Arthas: her friends, her family, her beloved Quel'Thalas. Her life. Her ability to care, truly care, truly feel any emotion save hate and anger about those things. And she had attempted a reunion. Had accepted her older sister's offer to call what Arthas Menethil had left of her family together, to reclaim Windrunner Spire and purge it of the dark things that dwelled in it. And perhaps to purge themselves of their own darknesses by harking back to a time when there were no shadows within them. But it had been a futile endeavor. Suns and moons they had been when they were young. Bright Alleria, with her gleaming golden tresses, and laughing young Lirath. Sylvanas had been Lady Moon, and Vereesa, the youngest of the three sisters, had been Little Moon. Vereesa was bowed and sullied with grief for a lost love. The death of her husband, Rhonin, in Theramore, one of so many victims of Garrosh Hellscream's mana bomb, had shattered her. Shattered her so completely that for one lost, lonely, lovely moment, she had turned to her shadow sister, Sylvanas, and they had plotted together. Vereesa
had come so close to joining Sylvanas in the Undercity. So close to joining her in undeath. But at the last minute, love for her living children had eclipsed Little Moon's grief for her dead husband. And so Vereesa had stayed with the Alliance. And Alleria, thought lost for so long and then miraculously returned, had invited the unfathomable darkness of the Void within her. It granted her powers and strength. But it changed what she looked like as well as who she was-who she was becoming. Sylvanas knew enough of what such powers could do to recognize the mark of cold fingers on Alleria. As for her own shadows and darkness, Sylvanas knew them well enough not to examine them now. The boy king's plan was a foolish one. He still believed that people could change. Oh, they certainly could. Alleria, Sylvanas, and Vereesa were all proof. But it was not change for the better; at least, Anduin would not see it that way. Why was she so angry? The pup got under her skin so much more than the Wolf had. She returned her attention to the letter.
We are not currently at war. But I am not so naive as to believe that means hostilities do not still linger. We have experienced recent tumultuous change to our very world in the form of Azerite-a manifestation of the pain Azeroth herself is feeling. With unity, we could direct our exploration of this substance in ways that can save her. Let us therefore focus on a smaller but no less important gesture of unity as a first step toward a potential future that benefits both the Horde and the Alliance. I propose what amounts to a single day of a cease-fire. On this day, those families who have been divided by war and death will have a chance to meet with the ones they lost. Participation will be strictly voluntary. All those on
the Alliance side will be thoroughly vetted, and no one who I believe would be a danger to the Forsaken will be allowed. I would ask the same of you. We will determine a limited number of participants. A site suitable for this event is the Arathi Highlands. I will have my people assemble at the ancient fortress of Stromgarde Keep. Thoradin's Wall is close to a Horde outpost. There, in the open field, with sufficient protection as agreed upon by the two of us as leaders of human and Forsaken, these ruptured families will meet. It will last from dawn until dusk. With your agreement, Archbishop Faol and other priests will facilitate, assist, and offer comfort as needed. Should any harm befall my people, be certain I will not hesitate to retaliate in kind. I also understand that should my people harm any Forsaken, you will do likewise. As a priest, as king of Stormwind, and as the son of Varian Wrynn, I will guarantee safe passage to the Forsaken who choose to be involved. If this cease-fire is successful, it could be repeated. Do not mistake this for an offer of peace. It is only an offer of a single day's compassion for people who were cruelly torn apart by a force that was neither the Horde nor the Alliance. You and I have both lost family, Warchief. Let us not force that upon others who, like us, did not choose it. Done this day by my hand, KING ANDUIN LLANE WRYNN
"He is even more foolish than I thought if he believes I do not see right through his trap," Sylvanas said, crumpling the letter into a ball. "What do you think of this Archbishop Faol who gave you the letter?"
"He is indeed Forsaken. He seems genuine, though when I suggested he pledge fealty to you and the Horde, he demurred. He said he preferred to serve the Light rather than kings or queens." "Ha!" Sylvanas said without humor. "I liberated him to be a Forsaken so that he could have free will, and thus am I repaid. No matter. I take it you believe he is harmless." "He is powerful, Dark Lady. But he is no enemy. He also brought a letter for the head of the Desolate Council." Sylvanas tensed. "I see that the king's spies are hard at work if Wrynn knows of the council." Wrynn. For so long it had meant Varian. Strange. "Possibly. We must remember that many of our number move freely in the Netherlight Temple. Besides, the letter he sent to her did not even mention the council. It turns out that until very recently, Elsie herself was among the number of Forsaken who had living family. Her husband, Wyll Benton, served both Varian and Anduin Wrynn." "Elsie?" "It was the name Wyll had for Vellcinda, and she's reclaimed it now," Nathanos explained. The majority of Forsaken had taken new given names or surnames for themselves. They did so to mark their rebirth as Forsaken, to cast aside their old identities and bind themselves together as a unified group. Sylvanas was surprised to find that her chest ached to hear that Vellcinda had rejected her Forsaken name. "Vellcinda" was a name with dignity, gravitas. "Elsie" was...well, evocative of what the woman had been in life, most likely. Common and ordinary. And human. Sylvanas focused on the other piece of information her champion had given her. This plan of Anduin's seemed suddenly much less strategic than personal if he had lost a devoted servant. Which made it much less threatening. Even so- "Vellcinda likely served the royal family as well." Sylvanas would not dignify the Prime Governor's new, offensive name by utilizing it. "Yes. She worked in the kitchens," Nathanos continued. "She was saddened to hear of her husband's passing. This proposition meets
with her approval, as she believes that she is far from alone in retaining fond memories of family members." Sylvanas shook her head. "This cease-fire is a mistake. It will only lead to pain for my people. They cannot be human, and to dangle this temptation of reunion with loved ones will result in them growing discontented with who they really are-Forsaken. They will deteriorate to heartbroken shells, wanting something they can never have. I have no wish to see them suffer so." Again, she thought of her own attempt at connection with the living and how all it had done was stir up old ghosts best left resting in peace. "You could use this to your advantage," Nathanos said. "Vellcinda said that many Forsaken wish their next death to be their Last Death. They do not wish to keep existing. And one reason commonly cited is that they want to be with those they loved while they lived." Sylvanas turned her head to him slowly, considering his words. "If you authorize this experience-this reconnection with people they loved in life-and present it to them as something that you have generously granted them, perhaps they will be more amenable to accepting your solution: finding ways to keep the Forsaken as a race from going extinct." "It is fraternizing with the enemy," Sylvanas said. "Letting them interact with life and the living." "Perhaps. But even so, it is only for a single day. Give them this hope, this moment with people they thought they'd never see again. Then-" "Then I hold the power to their happiness, at least in this aspect," she finished. "Or they might decide they hate the living and be all the more devoted to their Dark Lady." Either way Sylvanas would win. He nodded. "At the very least, it will demonstrate to them that you are listening to their concerns. I truly believe the Desolate Council to be ultimately harmless. They're not radical traitors. Give them this chance, once. If you see benefits, you can determine if you wish to repeat it." "You make a good argument." She unfolded the crumpled missive
and read it again. "It will be difficult for my archers to stay their hands with so many humans in front of them." "They will obey you, my queen," Nathanos said. It was the truth. Her dark rangers would never loose an arrow without her orders. And Sylvanas was not ready for a war with the Alliance, not over this, at least. She made her decision. "I will accept this invitation on behalf of the Forsaken. Return to the Undercity. Inform Vellcinda Benton that her queen is sympathetic toward her desire and will be visiting her to discuss this gathering in more detail. Have her begin compiling a list of those members of the council who have living relatives in Stormwind. Get their names and information. I will give that list to Anduin so that he can locate them and determine if they, too, wish to participate." "There are more than just the council members who would like to be involved," Nathanos said. "A great many attended the memorial service and are sympathetic to them." But Sylvanas shook her head. "No. This needs to be a small number so I can control the situation. Council members only." "As my queen wishes. If I may speak freely, I believe you have made a wise decision. From all that I have seen, I believe this will quell any rumblings of discontent." "One way or another it will." She smiled coldly. "It could also pave the way for claiming Stormwind. I had thought that an attack would be the only means to take it. But if the young king trusts us, we could one day soon pass through those magnificent gates to a friendly welcome." Her thoughts once again went to the astonishing substance that was Azerite. What it could do. What it could create. What it could destroy.
Shortly after Saffy had agreed ("of your own free will, now," Grizzek had emphasized) to assist him in plumbing the potential of the magical, marvelous, miraculous Azerite, Gallywix had sent them a single large vat of the stuff along with a note: You two creative kids go crazy! The first experiments had covered the basic steps: identifying the material's properties, testing it under various conditions. Exposed to sunlight and moonslight. Sealed away, exposed to air. Immersed in various liquids, including acid and other highly dangerous chemicals. That had been Grizzek's favorite part so far. During one such experiment, Saffy noticed that the thick, tarlike substance of a deadly poison they'd smeared on a sample chunk had changed color. "Will you look at that," she said. Quickly she grabbed a vial of the antidote and set it down within easy reach. Then, before Grizzek could even yelp in surprise, she'd extended a hand and touched the discolored poison. "Saffy, no!" He surged forward and grabbed her arm with one hand
and the antidote with the other. "Hang on a minute," Saffy said. "This stuff should be eating my skin away by now. But look. I'm fine." They both stared at the poison on her hand, then at each other. "Nothing ventured, nothing gained," Saffy muttered. And she licked the stuff off her fingers. Grizzek uttered a strangled cry. Saffy smacked her lips. "Astounding! This highly poisonous, corrosive substance now tastes like sunfruit and cherries," she said. "Maybe it always tasted like that," Grizzek offered. His voice trembled a little. "No, it's supposed to be completely tasteless." "Yeah, whatever, just...just don't do stuff like that, Saffy, okay?" She looked at him and saw that he had gone pale. He had been worried about her. Not just worried as in oh, I'm going to lose my lab partner worried but worried as in... Saffy couldn't let herself think about that. They had work to do. Bringing old feelings back would only be a distraction. They'd always done better as lab partners, anyway. She returned her attention to her hand. "This is...important, Grizzy. Really important. Long term, who knows what this stuff can do? We've just seen that it can neutralize poison. Bet it can heal wounds, too. Maybe it can extend life." She shook her head in disbelief. "What a gift! Come on, back at it! There's so much else we need to know!" After they'd done everything they could to test Azerite in liquid form, next up were tests to determine if, once it had hardened, anything could break it. Nothing could. Not a sword, or a hammer, or a goblin shredder, or even a device Grizzek had named the Crunchola, which he demonstrated to Saffy. It was a modified shredder, but one of its mechanically operated limbs was outfitted with a grasping hand augmented by an energy beam. "The idea," Grizzek explained, "is that the energy pulse increases the pressure, so it's seven times as strong as the usual hand."
"That's an odd number," Saffy observed, perplexed. "It is!" It took her a second, then she said flatly, "I meant odd as in unusual. Why not ten or fifteen?" He shrugged. "Seven is supposed to be lucky." She rolled her eyes. They scooped out a pail of liquid Azerite from the tightly sealed vat Gallywix had provided and placed it to harden in the open air. The substance slipped out easily once it set and was surprisingly light. The Crunchola, or "Crunchy," as Grizzek, who seemed inexplicably fond of the thing, dubbed it, grasped the chunk of Azerite in its Lucky Seven energy-enhanced hand. Grizzek threw the switch. The Crunchola squeezed-tight-tighter- And then Grizzek shrieked in dismay as its four digits snapped. "Your hand!" he cried. "Crunchy, I'm so sorry!" Saffy looked at her notes and crossed off "TEST NUMBER 345: Crunchola" and wrote down "Azerite 1, Crunchola 0." "One resource we do lack is a mage," Saffy commented, peering at the unharmed, pail-shaped Azerite. "It would be fascinating to see how this is affected by magic!" "If you really want one to join us, I can ask Gallywix." Grizzek didn't sound so keen on it, and Saffy stiffened at the thought. "Maybe later. Right now we have a good rhythm going with just the two of us." She was surprised that she was saying it, but it was undeniably true. The thought of a third party entering their lab felt wrong somehow. Grizzek seemed to brighten at her words. "Yeah, we do," he said. He climbed out of the Crunchola, patting its arm sadly. "I'll fix you up, buddy," he promised. Then he took a deep breath and turned to Saffy. "Magic can be phase two," Grizzek said. "Let's exhaust our own resources and imagination first. Give Gally-boy a baseline for what we can do with pure science." Saffy giggled. "Gally-boy?" Grizzek scratched his enormous nose and chuckled a little bit.
"Yeah," he said. "Silly, but the guy bugs me so bad." "I think it's perfect," Saffy announced. Their eyes met, and Grizzek's expression was unguarded. "Ya do?" he asked, surprised. "Yep," she replied. "Pompous airbags sometimes need the occasional sharp poke. Deflation is better than exploding." "For him or for us?" "Oh, for him, definitely. I don't care if he explodes." They laughed together, just as they had in the old days, in that narrow band where everything had been perfect and they'd been crazy about each other instead of being driven crazy by each other. Watch out, Saffy, the gnome reminded herself. Don't jinx this. It's all going too well for things to turn bad. "We've gathered a good baseline on the nature of the substance in isolation," she said. "I'll compile my notes, and then we can move on to see what happens when we try to shape it, or manipulate it, or combine it with other items." "Oooh! We should do wearable items." "Like rings or necklaces?" "Yeah! Gally-boy inadvertently gave me the idea. He used the first known chunk of this stuff as an ornament for his cane. We can experiment with it and figure out how to make amulets, rings, and other trinkets with it. Think we can mix it with other metals?" "We'll find out!" That was her specialty. "But first I better compile these notes." But Grizzek was shaking his head. "Nope. Those can wait. Go outside, clear your head." "I never go outside." "I know. But you oughta. Moons'll be out here soon. Go on, scram. I'll handle dinner." It was not said unkindly. "Do you still burn things down when you cook?" she asked. "Not so much these days." He made a shooing motion. With a shrug, Saffy ambled out to the beach. She was not alone, of course; Gallywix's
goons were stationed all around the enclave and even patrolled the beaches. But they kept their distance and didn't bother her or Grizzek too much. He'd put out a chair, and there was a table. An umbrella was up as well, not that one needed it at this hour. As Saffy settled into the chair, she had to admit that the sky was absolutely glorious and the moonslight on the ocean was astonishingly soothing. Saffy usually took a while to wind down when her brain was percolating briskly. She heard the noise of something clattering behind her and turned to see Grizzek balancing a tray in one hand and lugging a chair with the other. He didn't say anything as he plunked the tray down on the table and pulled up the chair. "Wine," Saffy said, startled. "You poured wine." "Yeah," he grunted. "Had a bottle somewhere. Knew you liked the stuff." He hadn't really cooked, which was probably why the place was still standing. He'd just reheated some seafood stew she'd made for lunch and grabbed some bread. They ate in silence, listening to the sound of the sea. Saffy was thinking very, very hard, and not about Azerite, though that did want to sneak in around the corners of her pondering. "Grizzek," she said. "Yeah?" "When I first came here, you called me by my nickname." One of them, at least; they'd had several of them over the sliver of time when things were going well. Their marriage had been, well, as short as they were. They had been lab partners first, and that had gone well, but then they'd been stupid enough to fall in love with each other. The first month had been glorious, the very epitome of a great love story. And then it had fallen apart just like one of Grizzek's faulty and poorly designed contraptions. Suddenly everything one did irritated the other beyond tolerance. Many things got thrown or broken, and once Saffy had found herself shouting so loudly that she lost her voice. That had been a horrible day. Grizzek had felt free to taunt her, and she couldn't
shoot back a pithy retort. But not even the unpleasantness of that dreadful time seemed to encroach on their collaboration now. They worked together almost seamlessly, listening to what the other said, offering suggestions, forming a true partnership. Saffy was loath to admit it, but the last few weeks working alongside Grizzek had been pretty good. Wonderful, actually. That in itself was almost as unbelievable as the strange material she and her former husband had been working with. She heard him sniffing and clearing his throat. "Yeah," he said. "I guess I did call you Punkin. Sorry, I guess." Saffy sipped her wine and thought some more. "It's been good, these past few weeks." "Yeah, it has." "It reminds me of old times," she said cautiously. "Me, too," he said quietly. She wanted to ask a thousand questions. Do you still miss me? Why do you think we don't hate each other anymore? Is the Azerite affecting how we feel about each other? Can we only be all right when we're working? Would it be a mistake to try again? Instead, she said, "This Azerite...it's pretty amazing. Could help a lot of people." "You're a genius, Saffy. An absolute genius. You're going to make such things-" "And you, Grizzy," Saffy said enthusiastically. "Your robots, and your launchers, and those little one-person airships-the Azerite's going to help with all that, too!" "Ya think so?" "I know so!" "Saffy, we're going to make this world sit up and take notice, you and me. The sky's the limit." Slowly, her heart beating as fast as a rabbit's, Sapphronetta Flivvers slid her hand across the table. And felt Grizzek's big green callused paw close around it. Gently, protectively, as if it was the most precious
thing in the world. And Saffy smiled.
-
In between kisses and canoodling, the reunited, reinvolved pair got a staggering amount of research done. They mixed the Azerite with a variety of different metals and even used it as paint. They made pendants, rings, bracelets, and earrings. And they made armor. It was ugly, goblin-designed stuff, but it wasn't meant to be pretty. It survived three solid minutes of bombardment from the reconstructed Lightning Blast 3000. The only damage was a slight melting of the metal. All of this had required only a small amount of Azerite. Then Saffy decided to go full gnomish alchemist. She began to experiment with potions. With a single drop of one on Grizzy's completely smooth green pate, he grew a luxurious mane of thick, glossy black hair that flowed down his back. "Aaaah!" he yelped. "Cut it off, cut it off!" When a drop of poison was mixed with heated Azerite, a result similar to the earlier experiment in which Saffy had licked off poison was achieved. When she poured the mixture on a struggling plant, the palm tree doubled in size. "That's a high ratio of Azerite to poison," she mused. "Let's see what happens when we switch the proportions." "Careful there, Punkin," Grizzek said worriedly. "I only just found ya again." Saffy's heart warmed, turned over in her chest, and turned to mush. Figuratively, of course. She went over and kissed him soundly. "I'll take every precaution and then some." He hovered anxiously as she prepared the poison, then offered to be the one to mix it with the Azerite. "Oh, Grizzy, you're so sweet! But you don't know exactly how much I used." Sticking out her tongue in order to concentrate better, Saffy poured
the precise amount of Azerite into the beaker of poison. There was no visible change to the substance as she swirled it gently to mix the contents. Then she took a deep breath and poured a single drop on the plant. The reaction was immediate. The plant went from the almost absurdly healthy, vibrant emerald green color to first sickly yellow, then black. It drooped, completely dead. They stared at it, then at each other. They said nothing. Saffy tried it on another plant. But this time, before the poison's effects had visually manifested, she clipped a segment. The pair of scientists pressed their heads close together as they watched the section rot right before their eyes, as if every fragment that made up the plant had been targeted instantly. Saffy spoke first. "Let's increase the amount of Azerite." As she was doing so, Feathers flew into the room and circled their heads. "Big ugly guests! Big ugly guests!" it squawked. They looked at each other, wide-eyed. "I hope it's not Gallywix," Grizzek muttered. "Hopefully it's just the goons. I'll get rid of 'em. Be right back." Saffy's eyes followed him as he left. She had never before regarded "just the goons" as a hopeful phrase, but the alternative would be far worse. They weren't prepared to demonstrate anything to the leader of the Bilgewater Cartel goblins yet, and to say that what they'd just witnessed made her uneasy was as much of an understatement as saying the Sword of Sargeras was a knife stuck in the ground. She took a moment to jot down her notes, cataloging the precise ratios, then doubled the amount of Azerite in the deadly mixture. She'd just poured a dollop onto another plant with almost identical results when Grizzek returned. His normally healthy emerald green coloring had paled to a sickly chartreuse. "You don't look good, Grizzy," Saffy murmured. "Well," he said heavily, "I got good news, and I got bad news. The good news is that that was indeed just the goons."
Saffy let out a breath she hadn't realized she'd been holding. "Thank goodness for small favors," she said. "Bad news is Gallywix wants a demonstration in two weeks. And," Grizzek added heavily, "he wants us to focus on weapons."
Parqual Fintallas stood with the other members of the Desolate Council for what, he hoped, would be its most productive meeting yet. This time, he stood a step lower than he usually did, as did all the members. The Prime Governor herself stood not on the topmost stair but one step below it. This time, someone else-someone who should have been at every single meeting of the council-would finally be present and occupying that place. Archbishop Faol, who had become a regular at the Undercity over the last few weeks, stood beside Elsie. They put their heads together and talked quietly. The room was filled to capacity. Those who drew breath doubtless would have difficulty doing so in this room; Parqual was well aware that although some of the Forsaken had dried out rather than decayed, most of their number had been raised while they rotted, and the smell could not be a pleasant one. Elsie was smiling. So were most of those assembled. They were excited to be present for this meeting. Parqual was glad, too, but was not as hopeful as they were about the end results. He and a few others
wanted to move much faster than patient, forgiving Elsie did. He did not expect Sylvanas to move at a rapid pace, but he was willing to listen to what she had to say. All at once, the room went quiet. Parqual turned and saw the figure of Nathanos Blightcaller standing in the doorway at the end of the long corridor that led into the large room. Nathanos waited for a moment, then announced: "Queen Sylvanas Windrunner, warchief of the Horde and beloved Dark Lady of the Forsaken, has arrived." A cheer arose. Not as lively as an orc's bellow or as sweet as a hurrah from a blood elf, but as genuine as it could possibly be coming from dead throats. And then she was there. Even here, in the safest place in the world for her, Sylvanas Windrunner had chosen not to shed her armor, Parqual mused. Did she simply never remove it? She stood straight and tall, unlike so many of those who adored her. Beautiful still, whereas they had been ravaged by death and rebirth. Then she inclined her head in acceptance of their adoration and strode with a smooth, elegant gait toward her place as queen of the Forsaken. "I have missed this place," she said as she looked around fondly, nodding to a few individuals she recognized. "And I have missed you, my people. The orcs, blood elves, trolls, tauren, goblins, and pandaren are worthy and loyal members of the Horde, but they do not have the unique bond that you, the Forsaken, and I do." There was a rumble of appreciation for the acknowledgment. With other races, it would be applause and stamping of feet. The Forsaken, however, had learned it wasn't wise to unduly wear out their appendages prematurely with such gestures. Clapping was terrible for the hands. Sylvanas looked down at Elsie. "Prime Governor. I hear from my loyal Nathanos that you have taken good care of my realm in my absence." Elsie inclined her head and bowed as deeply as she could. "Only because you were absent, my queen. We are dearly glad that you have
come back." "Only for a few hours, unfortunately," Sylvanas said. The regret in her voice sounded sincere. "But in that time, I hope I will be able to settle some things that will please everyone here." She looked out again at all of them. "I understand that the Prime Governor has also received a letter from the king of Stormwind. He proposes a day's cease-fire in the Arathi Highlands in order to hold a gathering of Forsaken and humans. Families or friends who have been separated by the slaughter that took place in this city only a few years past." Sylvanas turned her crimson gaze to Archbishop Faol. "Archbishop Faol has been speaking both to him and to the Desolate Council. What are your thoughts on this, Archbishop?" Faol didn't reply at once. He looked out at the gathered crowd, then back at Sylvanas. "You can trust King Anduin, Your Majesty. He means no ill. I know from my conversations with the Prime Governor and others in the Undercity that all those here today-and more than a few Forsaken who could not be present-are in favor of this gathering. It remains to be seen if the human half of this plan is also amenable. If they are, I and another priest from the Conclave would be honored to supervise the event." Excited murmuring swept through the hall. The Dark Lady paced back and forth for a moment, considering. Or pretending to consider, Parqual thought. She already knows what she will do. This moment is for our benefit. Finally, she stopped and faced the throng. "I will permit this." A cheer went up. Not a murmuring of approval but a genuine cheer, even louder than the one that had greeted the Dark Lady. Sylvanas let her lips curve in a faint smile, then lifted her hand, calling for silence. "But I must above all ensure the safety of my beloved Forsaken," she said. "So here is what I will say to the king when I reply. Each member of the Desolate Council will submit five names, in order of preference, of people in Stormwind they would like to meet. If these individuals are still alive, they will be contacted and asked if they wish to
participate. The king and a priest selected by the good archbishop will permit only those whom they deem sincere to attend. I will tell him that his people may assemble at Stromgarde Keep. On the selected date, we will fly to Thoradin's Wall before dawn. Champion Blightcaller, I, and two hundred of my finest archers will be there...in case the human king decides to betray our trust." It was possible. It was unlikely from this king if half the things Parqual had heard about him were true, but it was indeed possible. And he had to admit Sylvanas's words were a comfort. "Twenty-five priests will be mounted on bats and actively patrolling the field. In case of an open attack, teams of my dark rangers and others will be sent to defend you. I will allow the king to field a similar number of priest defenders, although I do not expect any member of the council to initiate hostilities." It was a lot to protect twenty-two Forsaken. But Parqual was highly aware of the significance of this meeting, as, clearly, were Anduin and Sylvanas. "At sunrise, you will walk forward to a halfway point that will be marked by Horde and Alliance banners. Archbishop Faol and his assistant will meet you there. As will your Alliance counterparts." Parqual had thought he had passed beyond the ability of such things to cause deep emotion, but apparently not. Philia. Would they be able to find her? Would she want to come? What would she think if she did? He was suddenly acutely aware of how bent and twisted his body was, of flesh that stank, hanging off exposed bones. Would she be horrified? No. Now that the possibility was manifesting, he realized he had wronged her by fearing her revulsion. Not his Philia. He was quietly certain of that. If his heart could still beat, it would be racing with excitement. He felt a gentle touch on his right shoulder and turned to Elsie. She was smiling for him. Oh, Elsie, if only your Wyll had lived just a little bit longer. But Sylvanas, apparently unaware of how profoundly her words had affected him and others, continued. "All participants will be allowed to
remain on the field until dusk. At that time, you will return to the wall, and the humans to Stromgarde Keep." She paused, again scanning the crowd. "Obviously, what I have just said assumes that everything goes smoothly. There is a chance that it will not. If I perceive any kind of danger to you, my people, I shall immediately order a retreat. A Forsaken flag-not a Horde one-will fly on the ramparts of the wall, and the horn will sound. If the Alliance decides to order a retreat, the same thing will happen, except they will fly the Stormwind flag on Stromgarde Keep and sound their own horn. If either horn is sounded, you must turn around and return to the wall at once." Her voice cracked like a whip and echoed in the vast chamber. The effect was chilling, and the crowd was utterly silent. "Now, then. Are there any questions?" Parqual steadied himself and raised his hand. The glowing red gaze fell upon him. "Speak," Sylvanas said. "Will we be allowed to exchange anything?" "Exchanges of trinkets will be permitted in the following manner," Sylvanas said. "Prior to the event, anything you wish to give to your counterparts will be examined. There will be areas on the field where they may be placed on tables when you reach the meeting site. The Alliance will do the same. Do not touch anything they have left on the tables while you are on the field. At the end of the day, these items will be collected and gone through to ensure they are safe and contain nothing seditious. They will be distributed to you at a later date. The Alliance will, I hope, do the same with your gifts." "Our Dark Lady is most generous," Parqual said. Sylvanas inclined her head. "I take it you have an item you wish to share." "I do." He thought fondly of a toy Philia once had loved. She had left it behind when- "Then it is my sincere hope that the Alliance does not decide to throw it away," Sylvanas said in that soft, purring voice. It was a cruel thought, and Parqual did not like to entertain it.
"Any other questions?" Another hand was raised. "May we touch them? Our loved ones?" "You may," Sylvanas replied. "Although I cannot guarantee that such a touch would be welcome." Again, an unkind thought. Doubt stirred in Parqual's mind, but he forced it back. Not his Philia. He had hoped hearing from his leader would make him feel better, but instead, he felt unsettled and unhappy. Others seemed to feel that way, too. And then he understood. Sylvanas didn't want them to do this, but she couldn't come out and simply forbid it. There were too many of them. Their ideas were spreading. Even people like Elsie, who were completely loyal to the Dark Lady, who loved her...even Elsie wanted to take the Forsaken in a different direction. So Sylvanas was doing what she could to rob them of any little pleasure in the planning. Suddenly he saw his "queen" in a new light. He saw many, many things in a new light. As if reading his mind, Sylvanas said, "I realize I do not sound optimistic. That is because I am not. I confess to you now, I wish you would not do this. Not because I would deny you any joy but because I would not see you hurt. You are ready to embrace your living relatives. But do they feel the same? What will you do if they do not wish to see you? If they think you abominations, monstrosities instead of the remarkable, courageous Forsaken that you are? If I am cruel, it is only to be compassionate." "Everyone knows that, my lady!" Elsie exclaimed. "Thank you, Prime Governor," Sylvanas said. "Are there any more questions?" There had to be. But no one was daring to ask them, and Parqual thought he had drawn enough attention to himself. "If there are not, Prime Governor, I have some for you. Will you join me later to discuss them?" "As my queen wishes," Elsie said. She turned to the crowd. "Everyone, I hope you share my pleasure and anticipation of the
coming reunion with our loved ones. I would like to thank Warchief Sylvanas again for permitting this to happen. It is my fondest wish in the world that this goes smoothly so that we may see our friends and families more in our future. For the Dark Lady!" Another cheer went up, and Sylvanas smiled fleetingly, then stepped down off the dais. The crowd of Forsaken parted for her. The cheering continued until Sylvanas, flanked by two dark rangers, disappeared into the corridor. Parqual turned to Elsie. "You seem a little melancholy," he said. "I thought you would be happy." "Oh! Oh, yes, I am. I do admit I'm feeling just a bit sorry for myself, though. I wish I'd been able to see my Wyll. To show him that after all this time I still have my wedding ring." Surprised, Parqual glanced down at her hand. She chuckled. "Oh, no, of course it doesn't fit on my finger anymore. My hands are too bony, and I wouldn't want to risk losing it. But it's safe and sound in my room at the inn nonetheless." He thought of Philia. "Elsie, I'm so sorry," he said. She waved a hand. "Don't you worry about me. I've had more luck and love than most. Wyll's legacy will be that many others are going to be able to experience something wonderful thanks to him. It's all right if we two didn't get to have it. One can't have everything." She leaned in conspiratorially to Parqual and whispered, "Even so, I'm going to loop the ring on a chain and wear it to the gathering." "Somehow I think he'll know," Parqual said, and meant it.
Anduin had frankly expected either an immediate refusal from Sylvanas or a dragged-out back-and-forth communication chain. To his pleasure-and surprise-the Horde leader had replied promptly that she was indeed interested in supporting his proposal. But, Sylvanas had written, we will start with a small, well-vetted group. I will not risk tempting the less noble among your people to assassination. There was a second letter, too. This one had cemented the rightness of his decision in his mind-and touched his heart as well.
Dear King Anduin, Thank you for taking the time to write so kind a note informing me of my dear Wyll's passing. He was terribly fond of your family, and it pleases me to know that the boy he took care of became the man who comforted him as he left this world. We all will die eventually, even we Forsaken. It moves
me more than you might imagine to know his last thoughts were of me. He has never been far from mine. Archbishop Faol has been a very kind presence here, and I write today not only to thank you but to let you know that all twenty-two members of the Desolate Council gladly accept your offer to meet with our loved ones who yet breathe-if they want to meet with us. Our beloved Dark Lady has asked each member of the council for five names to submit to you. This way, if one person is no longer living or doesn't wish to attend, there are other options for reunions. As for me, I've no one left that I know of to meet during this gathering of the living and the undead. Wyll and I weren't young when death parted us, and most of our connections were with the royal families and servants. If pressed, I would say I should very much like to meet you to express my gratitude in person, but I would understand that such a thing would be far too risky for you. Even suggesting this gathering shows much courage, and I commend you. Know that your letter is now one of my most cherished belongings, such as they are, second only to the wedding ring Wyll gave me so long ago, when we were both young and happy and the world was full of hope. Thank you for making it full of hope once again, if only for a single day. With respect, ELSIE BENTON
Anduin felt himself smiling. It faded as he mentally acknowledged that there were others who, though they would certainly be surprised by the pair of responses, would not be at all pleased. A knock on the door brought him out of his reverie. "Come in," he
called. He braced himself for another scolding from one of his advisers but was surprised when the guard opened the door and Calia Menethil entered. He rose and went to her. "Calia," he exclaimed, "it's good to see you. To what do I owe this unexpected pleasure?" He had been working at a table and now pulled up a second chair for his guest. She slipped into the proffered seat. "I reached out to Laurena. I was worried about your friend. I'm so sorry, Anduin." Her eyes, the same sea-blue that Anduin had seen in old paintings of Arthas, were filled with sympathy. "I understand that Wyll asked you not to heal him. As a priest, I know how hard a request that is to honor. Especially when it's someone you love." "Thank you. Wyll was such a constant presence in my life-and in my father's, too. I'm ashamed I knew so little about him personally. To me, he was just...Wyll." Anduin paused. "You've been with the dying, Calia. You know that sometimes when people pass, they believe they see their loved ones." She nodded her golden head. "Yes. It happens frequently." "In his last moments, Wyll was searching for his wife, Elsie." He looked at her intensely. "She was at Lordaeron." Calia inhaled swiftly. "Oh," she said. "And now you're even more determined to make this gathering happen." "I'm absolutely committed to it. My advisers were...not exactly happy with the idea, but it's going to happen." He held up both letters. "Two letters. One is from the warchief herself. She's accepted." Calia's face melted into a smile. "Oh, Anduin, I'm so glad! And the second?" "From Elsie Benton. The head of the Undercity's Desolate Council. She was Wyll's wife. And she wants this meeting, too." Suddenly Calia was up out of the chair and throwing her arms around him, laughing delightedly. He laughed a little, too, the first laughter that had passed his lips since Wyll's death. He hugged her back. Calia was close to Jaina's age, a little bit older. He had missed his "aunt," and was glad to have found someone similar in Calia.
She drew back, suddenly realizing what she'd done. "My apologies, Your Majesty. I was just so pleased-" "No apology needed. It's good to have someone who...well, who's similar to me in some ways. We both grew up royal children, and we both were called by the Light to become priests. If Moira were to drop in now, we could form a club." Anduin regretted mentioning Calia's former life almost at once. She stiffened and looked down. It was clearly still something she didn't wish to discuss. Before the moment grew awkward, he spoke again, changing the subject. "Sylvanas sent along a list of names gathered from all the members of the Desolate Council. I'm wondering: Would you like to assist me when I interview these people?" They both knew, but Anduin did not say, that she would be of particular help because she might remember some of the Desolate Council from their time as living beings. And she also might recognize some of the names on the council's list. She nodded. "Of course. I'll be happy to." "Before we get started on the interviews, there's someone I think we should meet," he told Calia. "He'll be here this afternoon." "Oh? Who?" "Someone who, I hope, will give us a feel for how the others might respond. Let's call it testing the waters."
-
Fredrik Farley was used to providing food, beverages, and entertainment for a crowded inn. He also was used to subsequently breaking up the brawls that often resulted from the combination. He'd cleaned up blood a time or two and had had to expel a few too-rowdy individuals from the Lion's Pride Inn, but mostly he simply made people happy. His patrons, be they locals or those just passing through, came to sing songs, tell tales, or sit by the fire with a mug of ale. Sometimes they poured their hearts out to him or his wife, Verina,
as they offered a sympathetic ear. What Fredrik Farley was not used to was appearing before the king of Stormwind. His first reaction when presented with the summons was terror. He and his wife took pains to run an aboveboard inn at the Lion's Pride. It had been in the Farley family for years and had offered brews to thirsty visitors since King Llane's time. Had someone lodged a complaint because of a recent scuffle? Accused them of watering the beer? "Young King Anduin has a kind reputation," Verina had said, trying to bolster them both. "I can't imagine him throwing you in the stocks or closing our public house. Maybe he wants to talk to you about a private party." Fredrik loved Verina, had since they were both in their early twenties. And now he loved her more than ever. "I think if King Anduin Wrynn wanted to host a party, he's got a lovely keep to do it in," he said, kissing her forehead lightly. "But who knows, right?" The letter the courier presented to him referenced "a personal matter" and asked for him to come "at his earliest convenience." That, of course, meant reaching for his coat and hat after the quick conversation with his wife and accompanying the courier back to Stormwind Keep. He was escorted to the Petitioner's Chamber. It was a large, austere room. Lit by lamps and candles, it included an area with a thick, richly embroidered rug and a few benches as well as a small table with four chairs in the center. A nobleman with an elegantly trimmed beard and two long, graying braids of hair greeted him, introducing himself as Count Remington Ridgewell. Fredrik was invited to take a seat. "No, thank you, my lord-er-Count," he stammered. How did one address a count, anyway? "I prefer to stand if it please you," he said. "It matters not at all to me," the count said. He stepped back a few paces and clasped his hands behind his back, waiting. Fredrik removed his cap and held it, now and then nervously running a hand over his bald pate. He expected to be kept waiting for a
while. Kings, he supposed, had quite a lot of things they needed to do in a day. He looked about the great chamber. So big! I could fit the entirety of the Lion's Pride in here with room to spare, he mused. "Am I addressing the innkeeper Fredrik Farley?" came a pleasant, youthful-sounding voice. Fredrik turned, expecting to see a squire, and instead found himself face to face with King Anduin Wrynn. But the ruler of Stormwind was not alone. An older woman stood beside the king, dressed in a flowing white robe. And slightly behind him was a muscular older man with white hair, a neatly trimmed beard, and piercing blue eyes. "Your Majesty!" Fredrik said, his voice climbing with surprise. "Your pardon-I wasn't-" He's so young, Fredrik thought. My Anna is older than he is. I hadn't realized that... The startlingly young king smiled easily and indicated a chair. "Please, do sit. Thank you for coming." Fredrik edged toward the chair and sank down, still holding his hat. The king sat down across from him, and the priestess and the older man who had accompanied him did likewise. King Anduin folded his hands and regarded Fredrik steadily but kindly. The older man crossed his arms and leaned back in his seat. In contrast to the king and the priestess, he looked almost angry. Fredrik thought him familiar-looking but couldn't place him. "I'm sorry for the mystery of all this, but it's a bit of a delicate matter, and I wanted to speak with you myself." Fredrik knew his eyes were as big as eggs at that point, but he was utterly unable to do anything about it. He gulped. Anduin waved to the attendant nobleman. "Wine for Mr. Farley, please, Count Ridgewell. Or would you prefer a beer?" The king of Stormwind is asking me if I want wine or beer, Fredrik thought. The world had gone mad. "W-whatever you're having, Your Majesty." "A bottle of Peaked Dalaran Red," he said, and the count nodded and left. The king returned his gaze to Fredrik. "You're an innkeeper.
I'm sure you'll be familiar with my selection." Fredrik was indeed familiar with the vintage, but it wasn't something there was much call for in the Lion's Pride, as the price was exorbitant. "I'm offering you a glass now because we're going to toast a very brave man," the king continued. "And then I'm going to ask you if you yourself would, if it were possible, be inclined to do a very brave thing." Fredrik nodded. "Of course, sir. It's as you wish." The priestess placed a gentle hand on his arm. "I know it's hard not to be nervous, but I promise you, you're free to leave at any time. His Majesty's request is just that, not an order." Fredrik felt some of the trepidation abate, and his heart, which had been pounding fiercely ever since the courier had arrived at the inn, finally started to slow down despite the older man's glower. "Thank you, Priestess." Anduin continued. "It's my understanding you lost your brother to the plague. I want you to know that I am truly sorry for your loss." This wasn't at all what Fredrik had been expecting. He felt like he'd been gut punched. But the young king's blue eyes remained friendly and sympathetic, and Fredrik found himself speaking freely. "Aye," Fredrik said. "We was close as boys. Frandis always liked to play with swords. He was good at it-ever so much better'n me. Got a job guarding supply caravans from ruffians. He would go from here to Ironforge or wherever the caravans went. That day, they went to Lordaeron." The boy-no, Fredrik, the king!-looked down for a minute. "And you thought Frandis died, didn't you?" Sudden hope seized the innkeeper. "He's not-is he alive?" The king shook his blond head sadly. "No. But he eventually became a Forsaken. And it was as a Forsaken that he became a hero. He was killed because he defied a tyrant-the warchief of the Horde, Garrosh Hellscream. He died because he wouldn't follow orders he knew were wrong and cruel." Count Ridgewell returned, bearing a tray with four glasses and the
promised wine. The king nodded his thanks and filled the glasses. Fredrik reached for his, careful not to hold the fragile blown glass too tightly. It was not the heavy mugs he was accustomed to at his tavern, that was for certain. Frandis-his brother-had been a Forsaken. Abruptly Fredrik started to tremble, and the wine sloshed around in the beautiful goblet. He took a gulp to steady his nerves, then kicked himself for not savoring the rare vintage. "A hero," Fredrik said, repeating King Anduin's words. "That don't sound like a Forsaken," he added cautiously, wondering if this was some kind of game. "Not like what we think of as Forsaken, no," the woman said. Beside her, the gray-haired man was looking increasingly irritated. "But does it sound like Frandis?" the king asked. Tears shimmered in Fredrik's eyes. "It do," he said. "He were a good man, Your Majesty." "I know," the king said. "And he was a good man even after he died. There are other Forsaken who also retain themselves even after...their transition. Not all of them, certainly. But some." "It...don't seem possible," Fredrik murmured. "Let me ask you a question," the king said. "Let's suppose, by some chance, Frandis was still with us. As a Forsaken. Knowing that he was still largely himself, still the good man who was your brother, would you have liked to meet with him?" Fredrik dropped his gaze to his lap. He saw that his large, strong hands had been clutching and twisting his hat until it had completely lost its shape. What a question! Would he want that? "Bear in mind as you answer, this may be your brother-but he would also be a Forsaken." For the first time, the older man had spoken. His voice was deep and had almost a growl to it. "He wouldn't be alive. He might be rotting. Bones would likely be jutting through his skin. He would have done terrible things as a member of the Scourge. And he would serve the Banshee Queen. Would you still be interested
in meeting your 'brother'?" King Anduin did not look pleased with the older man's words, but he did not silence him, either. Fredrik felt cold, reeling from the graphic picture that had been painted. It would be terrifying to come face to face with- With what? Or, more important, with who? With a monster? Or with his brother? Fredrik would have to find that out for himself, wouldn't he? The innkeeper swallowed hard and looked squarely first at the boyish face of his king, then at the gentle one of the priestess, then, less willingly, at the almost angry older man. His answer was for his king. "Yes, Your Majesty," he stated. "I'd have wanted to see him. And if he was as you say he was-someone who tried to stop something evil- then he'd still be my brother." The king and the priestess exchanged pleased glances, and the king refilled Fredrik's glass while the older man shook his head and sighed in frustration.
Over the next few days, Anduin and Calia took the list of human names Sylvanas had given them and dispatched letters to all those mentioned. Anduin himself wrote them rather than having a scribe do so. He made it clear that participation in the Gathering, as he and Calia found themselves calling it, was completely voluntary. No harm will come to you or your family if you refuse, he said in the missive. This is not an order but rather an invitation, a chance to see your loved ones again, although they are different from the ones you recall. The couriers delivering the letters had been instructed not to leave without a reply. Some of those on the list were literate and wrote their own responses; others dictated them to the courier. Anduin looked at the pile of responses and sighed. "Counting today's batch, there are more refusals than acceptances," he said. Calia smiled sadly but kindly. "That shouldn't surprise you," she replied. "No. It doesn't." And that's why it's painful, he thought but did not say.
"But there were some who accepted right away," she reminded him. "And every member of the council submitted five names, anticipating that some might not want to be involved." "True." It was good for him to remember that. Their task was still just beginning; all the people who did respond positively would have to be interviewed to ensure that their desire to reunite with family or friends stemmed from love and concern rather than vengeance. Others of his advisers had offered to aid Calia and Anduin in the process, but the young king had refused them. It was a bitter thing, but he didn't trust them to be unbiased. He'd seen how unhappy Genn had been with Fredrik Farley. People needed to understand what they might encounter, but they didn't need to be bullied into refusing. Anduin had been informed that negative sentiment was not limited to his advisers. Guards and Shaw's people had reported that there was muttering in some of the taverns and on the streets. The guards had been instructed to interrupt such conversations if they verged on sedition or grew violent. So far, nothing untoward had happened; the hatred expressed, the guards reported, was toward Sylvanas and the Horde for what they had done to their loved ones. Some still believed that death was better than becoming "monsters." Communication between himself and the Banshee Queen continued to go surprisingly well. They had hammered out a set of rules that each agreed to adhere to and that had even passed muster among his advisers for safety purposes. Everyone was, if not exactly happy, approving of the spot selected, the numbers chosen, and the steps that would be followed from the arrival of each faction's forces to the time and manner of their departure. At one point, Genn had confronted Anduin and asked him point blank: "How can you work so easily with the creature who betrayed your father? There's more blood on her hands than there is water in the ocean!" "It's not easy," Anduin had replied. "And she does have blood on her hands. We all do. No, Genn. I can't change the past. But if this goes well, then I can change the future: one person, one mind, one heart at a time. And maybe that will be enough so that a fresh outbreak of war
fueled by Azerite won't wipe out every one of us." The days passed. Anduin and Calia continued to meet with those whose names were on the provided list. Some were like Fredrik: individuals who struggled with the concept of a Forsaken as a "person" but yearned for connection. Others, though they might have expressed a willingness to meet with their Forsaken kin in the letter, were deemed unsuitable. Calia was a keen observer, and Anduin trusted the old injuries he had received from the Divine Bell to guide his decisions. And sometimes, sadly, it was quite obvious that the "reunion" would have resulted in violence. There was an undercurrent of hostility, an unvoiced desire to punish the Forsaken simply for the act of having died and been reborn. Others, usually with more than sufficient reason, were openly angry at Sylvanas. They were given coin and refreshment for their time and dismissed. "Hate," Anduin said once to Calia, "always surprises me. It shouldn't. But it does." She nodded her golden head sadly. "As priests, we cannot harden our hearts and still do what the Light would have us do. Vulnerability is our strength and our weakness both. But I would have it no other way." The candles had burned low in the chamber on the final day as the last person settled into the chair. Her name was Philia Fintallas, and the person who had asked for her was her father, Parqual. Philia looked to be about fifteen years old, if that. She had large, expressive eyes and a small button nose. With the vibrancy of her demeanor, she seemed as far removed from a Forsaken as the summer from the winter. "My father was a historian in Lordaeron, and I was born there," she said. "But we had family here-aunts, uncles, cousins-and I had come back for a visit. I was supposed to have gone home the day after-" She broke off, and tears welled in her eyes. Anduin fished out a handkerchief and handed it to her. She accepted it with a trembling smile of thanks and sipped at the water Calia had poured for her.
"After Arthas came," Anduin finished for her. He sneaked a glance at Calia. He couldn't count the number of times her brother's name had been mentioned during these meetings with survivors. And every one had cursed him heartily. On some level, it had to wound that man's sister. Anduin never identified Calia by name, and she never reacted to the vile things that were said about the slain Lich King. He admired her strength, particularly given what she had said about not hardening her heart. Philia nodded miserably, then took a deep breath and continued. "We never heard anything from Mama or Papa, so we assumed they were dead. Hoped they were dead, given all we had heard about the Scourge. Oh, isn't that horrible now that I know-I have to tell you that my uncle didn't want me to come when I got your letter, Your Majesty. But I had to. If by some miracle it's still him, I have to see him. I have to see my papa!" Her voice caught as the tears she had tried so hard to contain spilled down her cheeks. Calia had unfailingly been kind and comforting to all she and Anduin had spoken with, but this girl's obvious love clearly struck her powerfully. She rose and went to Philia, holding her tightly, letting her sob against her shoulder. Anduin thought he glimpsed tears in the priestess's eyes as the two women clung to each other, and a thought struck him. It was a delicate subject but one he needed to broach with Calia once their task here was completed. "It's true, I promise you," he said to Philia. "I haven't met your father, but I have encountered many Forsaken who remember who they were and who would be very happy to be reunited with those who have thought them dead or destroyed beyond recognition." Calia stood back a step from the girl, placing her hands on her shoulders. "Philia? Look at me." The girl did so, gulping, her eyes red and swollen. "I have heard of your father from someone who knows him as he is now. He speaks very highly of him and tells me he is still kind and intelligent. I believe it will be a joyful reunion for you both."
"Thank you! Thank you so much! When will this happen?" "We will send a courier with instructions," Anduin promised her. "Hopefully, not too long." When the girl left, beaming with joy, Calia gave Anduin a smile even though her face was still flushed from the empathetic tears she had shed. "I hope you see now what good you do, Anduin Wrynn." He gave her a lopsided grin. "I hope it will be good," he said. "I'll relax when it's all over. I couldn't have done this without you, Calia. You have a gift for reading people." "That was something I learned from an early age as a royal child, as I'm sure you did. Working so closely with so many fellow priests has only helped to hone that skill and temper it with compassion." There was a pause. Calia herself had just provided him a segue into the conversation he wished to have with her, but even so, Anduin steeled himself. "Calia," he began carefully, "you have been a tremendous help. And you aren't a Stormwind citizen. If this plan does lead eventually to peace, you'll be a hero of the Alliance." She smiled a touch ruefully. "Thank you, but I don't consider myself a member of the Alliance. I'm a citizen of nowhere now except perhaps the Netherlight Temple," she said. "I go where the Light wills me. I truly believe this is the right path toward mending other, greater rifts." Anduin couldn't let it go without making absolutely certain. Too much was at stake. "The kingdom of Lordaeron is your birthright. Few would be willing to let go of such a title and the power it would grant them," he pressed. "I understand your reasoning, but many do not. You may have some nationalist champions rising, ready to take the city in your name." Suddenly her expression grew thoughtful, and she searched his eyes. "Would you be among them, Anduin? Is that why you ask? Would the king of Stormwind make war on the Horde, scour the Undercity, to grant the queen of Lordaeron her empty kingdom?" The throne was hers by every right. Yet was it worth war should she
express a desire to claim it? She saw the struggle on his face and put a hand on his. "I understand. Don't worry. Those who currently inhabit Lordaeron lived there in life. The Forsaken are the true heirs. It belongs to them now. The best I can do for those whom I would have ruled is exactly what I'm doing. I've found peace and a calling where I can really matter. That's more important than a bloodied crown." "Sacrificing peace and a calling is usually the price of a crown," Anduin said. "You have not let it be so. Stormwind is fortunate to have you. But if you truly wish to thank me, I have a favor to ask. Of both you and the archbishop. I'd like to participate in the Gathering." Anduin frowned slightly. "I don't think that is wise," he said. "There may be those who recognize you. It could be dangerous. It could be... misconstrued." It could, in fact, lead to war. "If any of the Forsaken do recognize me, it will give me the chance to show that I bear them no ill will," she countered. "That I have no desire to run them out of the place that's been their home for so long. I want them to stay there. I want them to be safe." Anduin watched her carefully, taking a breath and centering himself. Light-let me know if she means them harm. He felt no responding ache in his bones, no hint that Calia Menethil was planning some kind of murderous coup. Her intentions were in alignment with the Light they both served. "I've already established a bond of trust with these people we've interviewed," she continued. "And no one knows the archbishop better than I do." This was true. And no one knew her better than Faol. "I will speak with the archbishop," Anduin said at last. "If he is agreeable, then I am, too." Calia beamed at him. "Thank you," she said. "It means more than you know." There was one last thing he felt compelled to say. "I have a question, and it's important that I know the answer."
Her golden hair, as golden as that of Arthas, as golden as his own, fell in a bright sheet to hide her face as she looked down. Her voice was small when she spoke. "I trust you, Anduin," she said. "If you feel you must know the answer, then ask it." He took a deep breath. "Calia...Is there a child? Do you have an heir?"
The unspoken words hung between them, heavy and sad, and Anduin knew the answer before she gave it. "There was a child," Calia Menethil said so softly that he had to strain to hear her. It was enough, but Anduin waited to see if she was ready to tell her story. Just as he drew breath to change the subject, she began to speak. "You must understand...my father was ordinarily a kind and understanding man, but on this one thing he was firm. He was to choose the man I was to marry, and I was to agree to it." Her sorrowful sea-green eyes lifted from the clasped hands in her lap. "I have made many mistakes and poor choices in my life. Everyone has, but as royalty, our decisions matter more than those of others because they affect so many more people. You may feel that you have to find a queen, have an heir. Your advisers will want you to make a good political match. Others might be able to live with such things. But not people like us. Promise me this, Anduin: whatever anyone tells you to do, don't marry if your heart doesn't tell you to." Her face was fierce but still beautiful and haunted, and her words
struck him with the power of truth. Even so, Anduin knew that in the end he would have to do what was best for his kingdom. "I cannot make a promise I may not be able to keep," he said, "but for what it's worth, I share your feelings on this matter." "We all do what we must," Calia said. "I was not the direct heir. I don't have your responsibilities. If I had, I might have agreed without protest. But Arthas was the heir, the firstborn son, and as he grew up, Papa began to focus more on him. It seemed as though he and Jaina would be a perfect couple-a love match as well as a sound political one. At least until Arthas somehow decided that it wasn't perfect." She paused, then looked up at him. "Jaina...I've been afraid to ask you. Is she..." "She's alive," Anduin hastened to reassure her. "We don't know where she is, but she can take care of herself." He did not tell her of Jaina's struggles or of her apparent abandonment of the Alliance. Calia had enough sorrows on her heart. Anduin had no desire to add to them unless she inquired. His words seemed to be enough for her. She smiled, her eyes distant, and said, "I'm glad. She was dear to me when we were younger. When the world was less cruel than now. And with what Arthas...became...I am deeply glad she was not wed to him. "But while Father's eye was on my brother, I conducted my own quiet rebellion. I fell in love with someone Father never would have approved of: one of the footmen. We stole what moments we could, and once, in the dark of night, we slipped away and begged a priestess to marry us. She refused at first, but we persisted. We came to her again and again, my sweet love and I, and at last, with the Light's blessing, we were wed." Her hand fell to her belly, flat now but once rounded with child. "When I was certain that I was carrying, I confided in Mother. Oh, she was furious with me! But she could tell by my face that this was a true love, and I assured her my child would be legitimate. Father was too caught up in Arthas to make much objection when my mother and I went on a 'long rest' to more remote parts of the kingdom."
Calia's hand ceased to move on her abdomen, and both hands curled into fists. "I got to hold my beautiful little girl and tend to her for a few weeks before it was decided that my husband would raise her, away from Lordaeron and ignorant of her birthright. Mother promised that when the time was right-when Arthas had finally married and produced an heir-we could acknowledge my daughter and perhaps elevate my husband to a nobleman's status so that her name would be unsullied. "That day never came. But the Scourge did." Anduin listened, his heart full of sympathy. Calia was describing being sold off like livestock to the highest bidder. She'd rebelled, fallen in love, and conceived a child. A daughter. For a brief moment, Anduin wondered what a daughter or a son of his would look like. Regardless of appearance or gender, that babe would rule one day...and until then would be deeply loved. "I don't remember much of that time. I remember lying in a ditch while the Scourge passed above me. I believe to this day it was thanks to the Light that they never found me. I made my way to Southshore, where my husband and child had been hidden away. We all three wept when we were reunited. But it was not to last." No. Not a second time. Anduin reached for one of her fisted hands. For a moment, it was tense beneath his, and then, slowly, the fist unclenched as Calia allowed her fingers to entwine with his. "You don't have to say anything else, Calia. I'm sorry I troubled you." "It's all right," she said. "I've started now. I think I want to finish." "Only if you wish," he assured her. She gave him a faint smile. "Maybe if I tell someone, the nightmares will stop." Inwardly, he winced; he had no response to that. She continued. "No one recognized me. Everyone assumed I was dead. We were happy for a time. And then came the blight. We ran. I wasn't about to leave my family again, but in the crowd we were separated. I stood in the middle of the street, screaming for them. Someone took pity on me, pulling
me onto his horse and galloping past the limits of the town barely in time. "There was a cluster of refugees in the forest. So many of us waited, desperate for word of our loved ones. Sometimes prayers were answered, and there were reunions that were..." Calia bit her lip. "I prayed that my family, too, would be spared. But..." Her voice trailed off. "I never saw them again." And then, with a realization that stopped his breathing with shock, Anduin understood why Calia had decided to befriend the Forsaken. Why, instead of seeing them as the destroyers of her city, her way of life, and all her family, she had chosen to identify with them. "You're hoping that your husband and child, too, became Forsaken instead of dying as Scourge," he said softly. "You're hoping you'll get word of them at the Gathering." Calia nodded, wiping at the tears on her face with one hand. The other remained clasped with the young king's. "Yes," she said. "It wasn't until I met the archbishop that I started to understand that the Forsaken weren't monsters. They were just...us. The same people you and I would be if we had been killed and given a different sort of life." "You don't know if your family would have been like that," Anduin cautioned. "They could have been driven mad or turned cruel. It might be devastating for you to see them." Genn's words to Fredrik came back to him now even as he spoke. "I know. But I have to hold out for the chance. Isn't that what the Light is all about, Anduin? Hope?" Anduin's mind went back to the trial of Garrosh Hellscream. When that orc had executed his escape, he had done so thanks to the chaos sown by an unexpected attack on the temple. In that battle, Jaina had been severely wounded. No, he corrected himself. She had been dying. So many tried to heal her, both Alliance and Horde. But the wound was too much. Anduin remembered kneeling on the cold stone floor of the temple, watching Jaina's labored breathing and seeing red bubbles form on her lips, his hands on her bloodied robe. Please, please, he
had prayed, and the Light had come. But he, like the others, was exhausted. And the Light he had called would not be enough to save her. He remembered others telling him to come away, that he'd done all he could. But he stayed there in those bleak, impotent moments before the death of this woman he'd loved as an aunt. No, he had told those who wanted him to walk away. I can't. And then the voice of his teacher-Chi-Ji, the Red Crane. And so, the student remembers the lessons of my temple. Anduin quoted Chi-Ji's words to Calia now. "Hope is what you have when all other things have failed you," he said. "Where there is hope, you make room for healing, for all things that are possible-and some that are not." Her eyes shone, and she gave him a tremulous smile. "You understand," she said. "I do," he said. "And I know that having you participate in the Gathering is the right thing to do." As he spoke, he felt warmth and calmness steal through him. That warmth passed through their clasped hands to Calia, and he saw the lines around her eyes and mouth lessen, her body relax. Whatever betided, this act of kindness was the right thing. Anduin had to hope that they would not pay too dear a price for it.
TANARIS The team of goblin engineer and gnome mineralogist picked up their pace. Saffy grilled Grizzek on everything he knew about his "boss," and it killed him to watch her face, normally so bright and cheerful- especially recently-grow darker and more withdrawn. Sometimes Grizzek bridled at how his people were regarded or, more accurately, reviled. Not all goblins were out to sell dangerous things at ludicrous prices. There were some who were even well regarded: Gazlowe, who operated out of Ratchet, south of Orgrimmar, came to mind. But Jastor Gallywix epitomized the worst that could possibly be said about goblins. He was cunning, selfish, arrogant, completely ruthless, and unburdened by remorse. He'd even sold his own people into slavery right after the Cataclysm hit, for crying out loud. Grizzek and his darling Punkin had become so engrossed in the breathtaking magnificence of Azerite that they'd lost sight of what surely was at the heart of Gallywix's desire to learn about it: its ability to kill anyone that goblin chose. "This is all my fault," Grizzek said at one point, more miserable than he'd ever been in his life. "I should never have trusted Gallywix to keep his promise. Should have known he'd want me to make weapons. And worst of all, I should never have dragged you into this. I'm so sorry." "Hey," Saffy said, slipping into his arms and snuggling against his sunken green chest. "While I cannot approve of your methods, I'm glad we're working together on this. You were right. You knew I'd want to be involved. I may have come here kicking and screaming-literally -but I stayed because I wanted to. And because-" Grizzek caught his breath. Was she going to say- "Because I'm glad that we found each other again. This Azerite is powerful stuff. Its natural state is toward growth and healing. Maybe even Gallywix will understand that it's much better to put it to those kinds of uses."
"Pookie," he said, "he's a goblin. We like to blow things up." She was, of course, unable to deny the truth in this. "Well," she hemmed, "building and healing are just as important as destroying and killing." Sapphronetta was so naive. And he loved her so much for it. By the time Gallywix showed up, all big belly, big attitude, and big smiles, they were ready. "Trade Prince," Grizzek said, "please allow me to introduce my lab partner: Sapphronetta Flivvers." Saffy dropped a curtsy, which looked ridiculous but endearing as she was wearing overalls and clunky boots. Gallywix appeared charmed. "Delighted, delighted," he boomed in his abrasive, raspy voice, taking her hand and pressing his lips on it. Saffy turned pale but did not pull away. "You were worth every copper to kidnap, my dear, and I haven't even seen your work yet." "Uh...thanks," she said. Her eyes narrowed, and it was obvious she wanted nothing more than to deck him, but again she refrained from actions that probably would result in their imprisonment and/or execution. "We've been working on a variety of things," Grizzek began, but Gallywix cut him off. "Lots of weapons, I hope," Gallywix said as he trundled through the door into the courtyard. "Our warchief is extremely interested in things that go boom. And I told her, 'Warchief,' I says, 'don't you worry, honey. I got the best guy who makes things go boom.' " "Actually," Saffy said, forcing a smile, "goblins already excel at making things go boom. What we've been working on is much more valuable." They led him inside to the lab. Arranged with an eye to impress were all their labors of love. They proceeded to put the items through their paces as Gallywix watched, his tiny eyes fixed hungrily on the Azerite. First they shared the wearable items: the jewelry and trinkets. "We got our inspiration from you," Grizzek said. "Your cane was the very first adornment made of Azerite!" Gallywix beamed and petted the
glowing golden orb under discussion. Saffy discussed the properties of the various trinkets, and Grizzek brought out the armor they'd crafted. "Holy smokes," Gallywix exclaimed as he watched the armor take minute after minute of direct fire from the Lightning Blast 3000. Next up was Crunchy's demonstration. Grizzek had rebuilt the damaged hand and winced afresh as yet again it was destroyed when the modified shredder tried to crush a lump of Azerite. "My, my!" Gallywix said. "That's tough stuff." "Think of the building material you could make from it," Saffy said. "It would withstand fires, earthquakes-" "Think of the shredders we could make!" "Er...yes. Let's move on." Next, Saffy demonstrated what Grizzek referred to as her "best parlor trick" of neutralizing poison and licking it off her hand. "You won't need to craft specific antidotes," she said. "Just carry around some of this and keep it liquid, and no matter the poison, it's no longer a problem!" "Ha ha! When we use it, poison is never a problem!" All of Gallywix's chins and his belly, too, jiggled with his guffaws. Grizzek was starting to feel sick to his stomach. His poor Saffy was looking as if she felt the same way. By the end of the demonstrations, Gallywix was not looking very happy. "I asked you for weapons," he said. "Specifically. By name." "Ah, yeah," Grizzek said. "About that. We, ah-" "Some things could be modified into weapons," Saffy said, startling Grizzek. "But I highly urge you not to do so. What we've shown you could save lives. Horde lives." That admission was hard for her, but she persevered. "You can build structures that the Alliance can't attack. You can extend lives, heal wounds, save people who otherwise might have died. This helps the Horde. You don't need weapons." Gallywix sighed and looked at Saffy with an expression that was almost kind and nearly respectful. "You're a cutie and a smarty," he said, "so I'll tell you nicely. We're
in a world that's always going to be at war, sweet cheeks, and the only ones who survive it are the ones with the biggest weapons. Grizzek here understands. You gnomes seem to have problems with that concept. Sure, sure, this Azerite does all the things you say it's gonna do. We will make buildings, and cure sickness, and save lives. But we are also going to grind the Alliance down beneath our heels, and, Miss Smarty-Pants, you need to decide if you're gonna be on the winning side when that all goes down. Believe me when I say I hope so." He looked at Grizzek, stabbing a finger at him to punctuate the words. "Weapons. Pronto." Then he tipped his hideous hat to Saffy and waddled out. For several long moments, neither Grizzek nor Saffy spoke. Then, quietly, Saffy said, "What he's going to do with the Azerite...those will be crimes against gnomanity. And humanity, and goblins, and orcs, and everyone. Everyone, Grizzy." "I know," he said just as quietly. "And we will have made it possible for him to do it." Grizzek was silent. He knew that, too. She turned to him, her eyes wide and shimmering with tears. "Azerite is part of Azeroth. We can't let him do that to her. We can't let him do that to us. Somehow we've got to stop him." "We can't stop him, Saffy," Grizzek replied. His eyes roamed the magnificent things the two of them had made out of their passion for science and tinkering-and for each other. All of them made his heart swell with pride and then ache with terror for how they would be used. She came to him and started weeping softly. He put his arms around her, trying to hold her tight enough to shut out the pain of their complicity. Then a thought occurred to him. "We can't stop him," he repeated, "but I think I have a plan on how we can stop something."
"Thank you for coming," Anduin said to his guests. "I know the hour is late, but it is important." "So your letter said," Turalyon replied. It was indeed late, well past midnight, but the young king suspected that neither Greymane nor Turalyon had yet seen his bed. Too much was going on. The king had requested their presences in the Cathedral of Light. A few acolytes and novices moved about even at this hour, but most of the priests were gone. He awaited them at the narthex of the cathedral and indicated that they should join him as he walked down the aisle toward the altar. "I wanted to give you an update on where we stand for the Gathering," Anduin said. They frowned, exchanging glances. "Your Majesty," Genn said, "we have already given you our opinion on this." "We have," Turalyon said. "With respect, Your Majesty, we have a fundamental disagreement on the Light's intentions and purpose." He hesitated. "I do not condemn you for your feelings. It would not be the first time a devotee has misunderstood the Light. I know I have. I
don't claim to be perfect or to have a true comprehension of it. No one can." "But you both do feel that this is wrong?" Anduin pressed. "That there is nothing to be gained by having Forsaken and humans meeting when a prior bond had existed between them?" "We have made that clear, Your Majesty," Turalyon stated. "If you have bidden us to come here at this hour simply to rehash this argument with you-" "No," Anduin said. "Not with me." "With me," came a rich, warm, oddly echoing voice. They turned around. Archbishop Alonsus Faol stood on the blue steps leading up to the altar. He was clad in a miter and robe that bespoke his stature in life. Anduin had looked diligently for the garments. It was, he had realized, easier for humans to recognize the outer trappings of an archbishop than what remained of the man himself. Both Greymane and Turalyon seemed stunned. Anduin waited but did not speak. This had to unfold between Faol and his oldest, dearest friends without interference from outsiders. Anduin said a silent prayer that everyone in this room would look with eyes of remembered friendship and see truly. "I'm quite aware that I don't look as you remember me," Faol continued. "But I think you recognize my voice. And my face is mostly intact, though it lacks that bushy white beard I was so fond of." Turalyon went as still as if he were the statue that stood at the entrance to Stormwind. The only thing that proved he was not was the rapid fall and rise of his chest. The expression on his face was one of utter loathing, but he did not speak or move. If Turalyon's reaction was cold, Genn's was pure fire. He whirled on Anduin, his face contorted in fury. Not for the first time, the young king was aware of the sheer power of the man even when he wasn't in his worgen form. He needed no claws and teeth, not even a sword, to kill. And right now, he looked as though he was about to rip Anduin
apart with his bare hands. "You've gone too far, Anduin Wrynn," Greymane snarled. "How dare you bring this thing into the Cathedral of Light! You're chasing this distorted ideal of what peace really is. And now you've brought that here." His voice shook. "Alonsus Faol was my friend. He was Turalyon's friend. We'd accepted that he was gone. He was buried at Faol's Rest. Why are you doing this to us?" Anduin didn't flinch. He had been expecting this reaction. When he got no response, Greymane turned on the source of his loathing. "Have you got the boy under some sort of spell, wretch?" he bellowed. "I know that there are priests who can do that sort of thing. Let Anduin go, get out of here, and I will not rip that putrid corpse of yours to shreds. "You chose this...this shambling existence. You chose to be this creature of nightmares. And you have to know what's happened to me. To my people. What yours did to me and how much I loathe what you've become. If you had any decency, any respect for those you once called friends, you'd have hurled yourself into the fire during your first Hallow's End and spared us all this!" Anduin closed his eyes in pain at the vitriol Greymane was hurling at a man he'd loved in life. He had known this would be difficult, but he had not expected Genn to be so malicious in his anger. Faol, though, seemed completely unsurprised by the reaction and looked at Genn sadly. "You stand there, a few strides away from an old friend, and you attack me with words chosen for their power to wound," Faol said. "And I know why you do so." "I do so because you are a monstrosity! Because your people are an abomination and should never have been created!" Faol shook his head. His voice remained calm, tinged with a hint of sorrow. "No, my old friend. You do this because you are afraid." Anduin blinked, shocked. Genn Greymane was many things, but he was no coward. Anduin did not want to interfere, but if it looked like Faol was in danger, he would do so. Although Faol was probably a
more powerful priest, even in his present state, than Anduin could ever be. Greymane stood absolutely still. "I've killed for lesser insults than that." The words were pitched low, a growl. "I know that," Faol continued. "And yet I say again: you are afraid. Oh, not of me personally." He put a withered hand on his bony chest. "I'm certain you believe you can take me in one of your heartbeats. You may be right at that, but I'd just as soon not find out." He shook his head sadly. "No, Genn Greymane. You're afraid because you believe that if you acknowledge here, now, with me, that Forsaken aren't irredeemable monsters-if you show any hint of understanding, or kindness, or compassion, or friendship-then that will mean your son died for nothing." A human cry of rage and pain turned into a wolf's howl as the Gilnean king arched his back. His form shifted, wreathed in mystical smoke as gray as the wolf's pelt. Taller, much more massive, he crouched on his lupine haunches and prepared to spring at Faol. Turalyon seized the worgen by the arm, shaking his head. "No bloodshed in this place," he said. "The creature doesn't even have blood," Genn snarled, his voice deep and ragged. "He's tied together like a stick puppet with ichor and magic!" "I know something about loss," the archbishop continued. Anduin marveled at Faol's calmness. "And I know something about you, too. You've held fast to that pain. It's served you well. It's enabled you to fight with unbridled ferocity. But like any edged weapon, it can cut both ways. And right now, it's coming between you and an understanding that could change your world." "I can't change my world!" Genn cried in a broken voice. The words were still blazing with fury, but shot through them was a deep thread of pain that made Anduin's heart ache. "I want my son back, but that banshee murdered him! She and her kind-your kind-nearly destroyed my people!" "Yet here you are," Faol continued almost placidly. "Many of you are
still healthy. Strong. Alive." For the first time since this confrontation began, the undead priest stepped forward. "Answer me this, old friend. If I had not come alone-if I had brought Liam with me, raised, as I was, and still himself, as I am-would your answer be different?" The worgen jerked back at words that pierced him more than any blade. He panted, his ears flattened to the back of his skull, his tail lashing the air. Anduin, himself reeling from the shock of the archbishop's words, lifted his hands, cupping them in preparation for the Light. But before he could act, Greymane howled in fury, dropped to all fours-and raced from the room. Anduin started to go after him, but Faol stopped him. "Let him go, Anduin. Genn Greymane ever had a temper, and now he's been forced to look at something sad and ugly within himself. He'll either come around in his own time or he won't. But now, whatever he says, he has realized he cannot tar us all with the same brush. It's a small victory, but I will accept it." "Victory." The single word was laced with more icy abhorrence than Anduin had ever heard, so filled with disgust that it physically hurt him. In the tense moments with Genn, he had almost forgotten the silent paladin. The two men had reacted differently but with the same repellence. Turalyon had no sword and wore no armor. Yet he still loomed large and powerful in the cathedral as he straightened to his full height. If Genn had been racked by anguished fury, Turalyon, one of the first paladins of the Silver Hand, was brimming with righteous rage. "You blaspheme what was once a good man," he snapped. "You have stolen his form and parade him about, wearing him as if he were a suit of clothing. Your broken mouth is good for nothing save spewing filthy lies. The undead are unholy. Whatever priestly powers they have come from the shadows of the Light, not the Light itself. If there is anything left in you of that good, kindly man I loved so much, you capering piece of carnage, come to me, and I will blast him into merciful oblivion." How could Turalyon not see what Anduin saw? The high exarch had
embraced a redeemed dreadlord as a companion and fellow soldier! The young king, too, had been initially horrified. But although the legendary paladin doubtless had encountered more dark things, including truly evil Forsaken, than Anduin ever would, Varian's son had seen courage displayed by one of Sylvanas's creations. He held fast to the memory of witnessing Frandis Farley murdered for daring to oppose unnecessary cruelty and violence. He recalled Elsie's letter, how it had nearly broken his heart. He had seen things Turalyon, in his thousand years of war against the Legion, had never witnessed. And now Turalyon was refusing to see something-someone-who stood right in front of him. "I created the Order of the Silver Hand," Faol admonished him, his voice growing stronger. "I saw in you something that no one else had. You were a fine priest, but that wasn't what the Light wanted you to be. The Light needed champions who could fight with both the weapons of humanity and the love and power of the Light. The others were strongest with the first and came to the Light later. You were the opposite. They were good, fine men. They were noble paladins. But they are all gone, and you have become the high exarch of the Light. You are too wise, Turalyon, to deny the truth. Deny that and you deny the Light itself." To Anduin's horror, Faol closed the distance between himself and the paladin. He spread his arms open wide. Turalyon trembled and his fists clenched, but he did not strike. "Look for the Light in me," Faol instructed. "You will find it. And if you do not, then I do beg of you to strike me down, for I would not wish to exist as a broken corpse the Light had abandoned." Anduin looked down to see that Calia had stepped beside him. She looked up at him, and he saw that she was afraid for her friend. He was, too, even though he had met the archbishop only recently. All will be as the Light wills it, he thought. For a moment, Anduin thought the paladin so enraged that he wouldn't even try. But then Turalyon lifted an arm. A ray of what looked like pure golden sunlight, impossible at this hour of night when
that orb hid its head, shone down upon both forms. Turalyon's face was hard as stone. It was the unforgiving expression of the righteous doing what they deemed to be the right thing. But then, as Anduin watched, transfixed by the silent struggle going on between belief and faith, that granite visage softened. Turalyon's eyes widened; then the radiant, golden glow that enveloped both the living and the dead caught the glitter of unshed tears. Joy spread across his face, and then, as Anduin watched, moved beyond the ability to speak, Turalyon, paladin of the Silver Hand, high exarch of the Army of the Light, dropped to his knees. "Your Excellency," he breathed. "Forgive me, my old friend. My arrogance blinded me to what was clear all along had I looked with the right eyes." And he bent his head for the archbishop's blessing. Faol, too, was struggling with emotion. "Dear boy," he said in a voice that shook, "dear boy. There is nothing to forgive. There was a time when I would have agreed with you. You are the sole living member of the original order, the last of the only sons I would ever have. I am grateful that I have not lost you, too, not to death, or the Void, or to your own limitations." He placed his hand, decaying and lifeless, upon the paladin's graygold head. Turalyon closed his eyes in quiet joy. "My blessing, such as it is, is upon you. There is no one, living, dead, or anywhere in the mysterious shades in between, who cannot benefit from always looking with eyes, heart, and mind wide open. Rise, my dear boy, and lead even better now that you have greater understanding of the ways of the Light." Turalyon did so, appearing clumsy for a moment before straightening. He looked over at Anduin. "I owe you an apology as well," he said. "I thought of you as someone who hoped for the best at the cost of wisdom. I could not have been more wrong." Anduin heard Calia sigh deeply with relief. "There is no need," he replied. "We are taught to fear the Forsaken. And even the archbishop understands that there are many whose rebirth turned them cold and
cruel. But not all." "No," Turalyon agreed. "Not all. I am overjoyed to have my old friend and mentor back." "We will work together," Faol assured him. "If only Greymane could have witnessed this," Calia said. "Like all people, he will see when he is ready," Turalyon said. "I will certainly reassure him as best I can. But for now, let me do what I can to aid you. Others should be able to have the gift that the archbishop and I have received this night." Anduin smiled. He could not see the future. But he could see this moment, and his heart was full. "I will accept your aid most gladly."
"Ya know," Grizzek observed as he and Saffy prepared their escape, "life with you is never dull." "We do keep hopping, don't we?" she replied, and gave him a look that turned his heart all gooey-melty. Grizzek, not being a complete idiot, had anticipated that at some point, someone who did not wish him sunshine and rainbows and a long happy life might come knocking. He had prepared for the eventuality by digging out-well, by modifying a second shredder to dig out, actually-a tunnel that opened up into a random spot in Tanaris. After Gallywix had departed, they'd decided to make a run for it. They packed up what they could take with them in the little mining cart, including a few airtight casks of Azerite, and everything else... well, some of it couldn't be destroyed, but they'd dismantled what they could. The bomb set to detonate an hour after they left also would help. All their notes were coming with them. They'd programmed Feathers to fly to Teldrassil with a warning about what had happened and a plea for rescue at a specific location. They would offer the
Alliance what they had discovered on the stipulation that they would be creating only things that could help, not harm. It was a risk. A crazy, glorious one, but it was the only option they had. Neither, they had decided, could live with knowing their discoveries were going to be used to kill so effectively. Just before they left, Grizzek took a long last look around. "I'm gonna miss this place," he admitted. "I know, Grizzy," Saffy said, her big eyes filled with sympathy. "But we'll find another lab. One where we can create to our hearts' content." He turned to her. "Anywhere in the world. Just so long as it's with you." Then, as her eyes widened with shock, he knelt in front of her. "Sapphronetta Flivvers...will you marry me? Again?" In his large green hand, he held one of the Azerite rings they had created. The base was rough because neither of them was a jeweler, and the Azerite was an imperfect drop that had been allowed to harden. But when Saffy said, "Oh! Grizzy, yes!" and he slipped it on her teeny tiny finger, he thought it was the most beautiful ring in the world. He embraced her tightly. "I am one happy goblin," he said, kissing the top of her head. "Come on, Punkin. Let's head out on our next adventure." They descended into the tunnel. "I hope it hasn't caved in," Grizzek said. "Haven't checked in a couple of years." "I guess we'll find out," Sapphronetta said grimly. It was a long underground trek from Grizzek's lab to the hills that separated Tanaris from Thousand Needles, where Grizzek promised Saffy they would emerge. Along the way, they talked openly for the first time. About how much they cared about each other and always had. About what they'd done wrong and how they felt they'd been wronged. Over meals, they analyzed what had worked this time that hadn't worked the last time. And when they slept, they did so snuggled close together. There were no cave-ins, fortunately. And finally, the pair reached the end of this phase of their journey. "According to my calculations,
it's about midnight," Saffy said. Grizzek believed her. "Perfect," Grizzek said. "It's a pretty remote location, but even so, I'd like to not pop out of this hole in broad daylight. How did you gnomes ever stand living underground, Saffy? I'm going bonkers without sunshine." "There's sunshine out there," Saffy assured him. "But we'll be living with night elves." "They get sunshine in Teldrassil, too; they just prefer to sleep through it." "You Alliance people are very strange." He kissed her. "But cute. Definitely cute." Grizzek had left a ladder at the end, and he climbed up first and undid the latch. "Look out below," he called down. "Huh?" Then: "Hey!" "I covered it with sand," he explained as the yellow grains poured down over them. He didn't mind. Freedom and a life with the gnome he'd given his heart to years ago awaited him above. He wiped off his face and clambered up the rest of the way, sticking his head up and blinking even in the faint light of the moons and the stars. Nothing looked out of the ordinary. Grizzek cocked his head, listening. He heard nothing. "Okay, I think we're good," he said, and hoisted himself up onto the ground. He extended a hand to help Saffy out. They stood, stretched, and grinned at each other. "Phase one complete," he said. "I'll go back down and bring up the rest of our stuff." "Actually," came a voice, "that won't be necessary." They whirled. A large goblin was silhouetted against the starstudded sky. Grizzek knew that voice. He reached out for Saffy's hand and clutched it tightly. "Druz, you and I always got along okay. Tell you what. I'll come back and work for Gallywix. No more tricks. I'll do whatever he wants. You can take everything we got. Just let Saffy have some food and water and let her go."
"Grizzy-" "I ain't letting you die, Saffy," Grizzek said. "We got a deal, Druz?" Druz climbed down, followed by no fewer than three other large, irritated-looking goblins. "Sorry, pal. We've been on to you this whole time. Within five minutes of you hopping down into your hole, we'd deactivated the bomb you set to go off in your lab. And as for your parrot, we shot it out of the sky. We just need what you took, and then..." He shrugged. "You're not just going to kill us? In cold blood?" Saffy stammered. Druz looked at her and sighed. "Little lady, your sweetheart here knew what he was getting you into. This comes directly from the boss. It's outta my hands." The other goblins leaped forward, grabbing both Grizzek and Saffy roughly. Grizzek made a fist and slammed it into the belly of the nearest one. He heard a yelp and a growl from Saffy and figured she'd gotten in a good blow of some sort, too. But any resistance on their part was but a gesture. Within a handful of minutes, the goblin and the gnome had been searched, slapped around a bit, and then tied up back to back. Even their feet were bound. "Hey, Druz! I got some notes off the gnome," one said. "Good job, Kezzig," Druz said. "This is dumb, Druz," Grizzek muttered through a mouthful of blood and broken teeth. "And you ain't dumb. I'm worth a lot more to you alive than dead." "Not really," Druz said. "We got all the things you made back in the lab. We got all the things you tried to steal. And now we got the gnome's notes. We can take it from here. You're too great a risk." "Hold me hostage," Saffy piped up. "You'll guarantee he won't escape." "Saffy, shut up!" Grizzek hissed angrily. "Tryin' to save you here!" "I got my orders," Druz said, sounding almost apologetic. "You ticked off the boss, and this is what we've been told to do with you." He nodded to Kezzig. "Set the bomb."
"Wh-what?" Back to back with Saffy as he was, Grizzek couldn't see her. But she sounded pale. "You try to blow up our stuff, we blow you up. Smaller bomb, though." Kezzig approached and shoved something cold and hard between the bound pair. "Sorry it didn't work out, Grizz. Look at it this way: it'll be fast. It didn't have to be." And they walked away, laughing and talking. Grizzek analyzed the situation. It was not good. He and Saffy were sitting back to back, tied together tightly with what felt like sturdy rope. Their hands were bound, presumably so that they would not be able to work them free and thus untie themselves. "Think maybe if we wriggle, we can scoot away from it?" Saffy. Always thinking. Despite the awfulness of the situation, Grizzek felt himself smiling. "Worth a shot," he said, though he didn't add that it might cause the bomb to go off immediately. She probably knew that anyway. "Count of three, scoot to the left. Ready?" "Yeah." "One...two...three...scoot!" They moved about six inches to the left along the uneven surface of the narrow trail. The bomb was still wedged solidly between them. "That's not going to work. Punkin, can you get to your feet?" "I-I think so," she said. On the count of three, they tried that. They toppled over to the right the first time. They attempted it a second time once they'd straightened up. Grizzek's foot turned on a loose stone, and they went down again. "One, two, three!" Grizzek said again, and then, with a grunt, they were standing. The bomb was still wedged tightly between them. "Okay, Pookie, it's not gonna drop out on its own. We gotta shake it loose." "You're the explosives expert, but I cannot imagine that would be productive to keeping a bomb unexploded."
"I think it's the only chance we got." "Me, too." Again, on the count of three, they began jumping up and down. Disbelieving, Grizzek felt the bomb shift. It had been pressing, silently threatening, against his lower back. Now it was at his tailbone. "It's working!" Saffy squeaked. "I think it is," Grizzek replied, trying not to be too hopeful. They kept jumping. The bomb slipped lower, lower... And then Grizzek no longer felt the pressure. He braced himself for what he secretly thought was inevitable: detonation on contact with the ground. But their luck seemed to be holding. He heard it plop on the sand but nothing else. "We did it!" Saffy cried happily. "Grizzy, we-" "Quiet for a sec," Grizzek said. Saffy obeyed. Grizzek closed his eyes sickly. In the silence of the desert night, he could hear the tick-tick. The bomb was on a timer. "We ain't out of this yet," he said. "Hop to the right and keep hopping." "For how long?" "Till we reach Gadgetzan." They hopped. Even as he believed the bomb was ticking away their lives second by second, Grizzek marveled at what they had done together. Even now, they were working together in perfect coordination. The clichéd well-oiled machine. "Grizzy?" "Yeah?" Hop. Hop. Hop. "I have a confession." "What's that, Pookie?" "I didn't tell you something I did because I thought you'd be angry with me." Hop. Hop. They were three yards away from it now. If only they both had longer legs- "Can't be angry with you for anything now, Punkin."
"I burned the notes." Grizzek was so shocked that he almost stumbled, but he managed to keep their rhythm. "You...what?" "I tore out all our notes and burned them." Hop. Hop. "There's no way Gallywix can re-create our experiments. He has a few prototypes and a couple of already-mixed potions, but that's it. Whatever awful thing he intends to do with Azerite, it won't be on us." Hop. Hop. "Saffy...aw, you're a genius!" At that moment, Grizzek's left foot turned on a slippery sandcovered stone, and he heard something snap. They toppled over, and this time, he knew with sick horror that he was not going to be able to get back up. Lying facedown in the sand, he couldn't determine how much distance they'd put between them and the bomb, and in the darkness, he hadn't been able to identify the kind of explosive Druz had wedged between them. Were they far enough away to survive if it went off? He gritted his teeth against the pain as he said, "Saffy, my ankle's snapped. We gotta crawl, okay?" He heard her gulp. "Okay," she said bravely, though her voice quavered. "Roll over so we're both on our left sides; that way I can push with my good leg." They did and started squirming away. "Grizzy!" Saffy gasped as she panted, "I still have the ring! My engagement ring!" The ring, made of commonplace ugly metal. And adorned with a small golden, glowing drop of Azerite. "It might be enough to protect us!" she said. "It might at that," Grizzek said. Hope, dizzying and wonderful, flowed through him, and he began squirming in earnest. "I got a confession to make too, Punkin." "Whatever it is, I forgive you."
He licked his lips. All these years, he'd never said it. Wasted, stupid years. But all that was gonna change, starting now. "Sapphronetta Flivvers...I lo-" The bomb exploded.
Anduin stood atop the ruined ramparts of Stromgarde Keep. The wind that stirred his fair hair was damp and cool, and the overcast sky did little to dispel the sense of sorrow that permeated this place. The Arathi Highlands were a part of Azeroth rich in both human and Forsaken history. Here, the mighty city of Strom once had stood, and before it, the empire of Arathor, which had given birth to humanity. The ancient Arathi had been a race of conquerors, but they had recognized the wisdom in extending cooperation, peace, and equality to the vanquished tribes. Those qualities had made humanity strong. Those ancient tribes of the Eastern Kingdoms had joined together, succeeding in carving out a nation that had changed the world. Here, too, was the birthplace of magic for humanity, a gift from the beleaguered high elves of Quel'Thalas in exchange for the aid of Strom's mighty army against their common foe, the trolls. All the major human nations had been settled by those who left Arathor: Dalaran, founded by the first magi instructed by the elves, as well as Lordaeron, Gilneas, and later Kul Tiras and Alterac. Those who stayed behind had built the fortress on which the king of Stormwind now
stood. He heard the sound of boots on stone and turned to regard Genn. The older man stepped beside him, his eyes roaming thoughtfully over the landscape of pine trees and rolling green hills. "The last time I stood here," Genn said, "Gilneas was a powerful nation and Stromgarde's star was waning. Now both kingdoms lie in ruins. This one's home only to criminals, ogres, and trolls. And mine is home to them." He pointed across the rolling fields to the gray stone of what was known as Thoradin's Wall. Anduin, Greymane, Turalyon, Velen, Faol, and Calia, along with exactly two hundred of Stormwind's finest, had arrived a few hours earlier from Stormwind Harbor. It had been sobering to see these ruins appear out of the mists, their stone as gray as the sky itself; more so, to stand where they stood now. Thoradin's Wall and the small Forsaken encampment outside it marked the farthest point of the Horde's reach in this land that was the birthplace of humanity. Gilneas was not too far, wreathed in blight, invaded by the Forsaken who had driven Genn's people to become refugees and had slain the king's son. Genn lifted a spyglass, made a soft growling sound, and handed the instrument to Anduin. Anduin emulated him. Through the gnomish tool, he could see armed figures patrolling the ancient wall. Just as his people did the walls of Stromgarde Keep. They were all Forsaken. Tomorrow, at first light, the Desolate Council would gather at the arch of Thoradin's Wall. They would march out to a halfway point marked by a fork in the simple dirt road. At the same time, the nineteen humans selected to meet with their friends or relatives would approach them. Calia and Faol would conduct the meetings. There would be no other Horde or Alliance interference, though each side had agreed to allow a group of priests to fly overhead just in case. Anduin returned the spyglass to Genn. "I know this must be difficult for you." "You know little about this," Genn snapped.
"I understand more than you think," Anduin continued. "I have Turalyon and Velen to assist me." Kindly, he added, "You didn't need to put yourself through this." "Of course I did," Genn said. "Your father's ghost would haunt me if I hadn't come." As Liam's haunts you, because you did, Anduin thought sadly. "It will all be over soon," he said. "Thus far, Sylvanas appears to have kept her word. Scouts report that everything seems to be in order on the terms we discussed." "If she did honor a promise, it would be a first," Genn said. "Whatever we may think of her, we must be aware that she is a master strategist and that she therefore believes agreeing to this will somehow benefit her and the Horde." "That's what I'm afraid of," Genn replied. "She's worried about losing her grip on the Undercity because of the Desolate Council, but she's smart enough to know that they're no real threat. So she agrees to one day where members of the council only are permitted to meet their loved ones. The council is satisfied. Plus, it's an honorable thing to do, and that placates any orcs, trolls, or tauren. It's shrewd politics." "She could very easily double-cross us and murder us all." "She could. But that would be a terrible idea. Going to war over this right when the Horde is recovering from a brutal one? When she could be focusing on Silithus and Azerite?" He shook his head. "A terrible waste of resources. I don't trust her to keep her word for honor's sake. I do trust her not to be stupid. Don't you?" Genn had no response to that. "Your Majesties," came Turalyon's deep voice. "I've put the priests into position. Per your agreement, twenty-five of them will mount their gryphons tomorrow and be our eyes on the battlefield." "It's not a battlefield, Turalyon," Anduin reminded him. "This is a peaceful gathering site. If all goes according to plan, it never will be a battlefield." "My apologies. I misspoke."
"Words have power, as I know you know. Make sure the soldiers under you refrain from using that term." Turalyon nodded. "We've seen nothing to indicate deception on the Horde's part. They appear to be keeping to the proper numbers and holding their positions." Anduin felt a flutter inside his chest that he quickly quelled with a deep breath. For all his insistence that this would not provoke a war, he shared the worries of his advisers. Sylvanas was indeed a good strategist, and she almost certainly had plans in place that even SI:7 had been unable to ferret out. For the moment, though, he would put aside his apprehension. Archbishop Faol and Calia would be conducting a service shortly, and after that he would move among those who had been brave enough- and who loved enough-to accept the chance to be reunited with people who would not be as they were in memory but who would be present. Would be, as much as the Forsaken could be, alive. There was still something left of the old sanctum of the keep. It was more than sufficient to house the nineteen civilians who had come to be part of the meeting, the priests, and any soldiers who wished to join them. There were a few missing timbers in the roof, and drops of drizzly rain fell on some of those who had assembled. No one seemed to mind. Hope shone on their faces on a gray day, and Anduin took heart in those expressions. This, he mused, is how you combat fear and long-held grudges. With hope and with open hearts. Calia and Faol waited until everyone was assembled, and then Faol spoke. "First, I want to reassure you that few people enjoy sitting through a religious service for long even at the best of times. And today," he continued, glancing up at the gray clouds, "suffice it to say I'll spare you a lengthy session spent standing in a drafty old building." There were some chuckles and smiles. Turalyon stood next to Anduin and said quietly, "They are still getting used to the idea of a Forsaken priest." Anduin nodded. "It's to be expected. That's why I asked Calia to
participate, too. Seeing the two of them side by side, priests of the Light, so obviously comfortable with each other, is a good introduction to what they're going to encounter shortly." "Has anyone recognized her yet?" Calia had donned a nondescript, practical dress and a heavy cloak with a hood. Most everyone had their hoods up in the light rain, so she did not stand out. Valeera had once told him that the best disguises were simple ones; appropriate clothes, behaving as if one belonged. No one was looking for a queen long thought dead today. "Not that I've heard. To them, she's just a fair-haired priestess." Turalyon nodded but still looked concerned. Faol continued. "Your king has already told you what we expect will transpire, and he has advised you about what to do if a banner is raised either at Thoradin's Wall or here at the keep. I wish to avoid tedious repetition, so I'll just say be alert and move quickly. "But I truly hope that doesn't happen. I and my fellow priestess will be out there with you. Others will be standing by to lend aid if needed. You may be shopkeepers, or blacksmiths, or farmers. But today you are my brothers and sisters. Today we are all servants of the Light. If you're afraid, don't be ashamed of it. You're doing something no one has ever done before, and that can always hold fear. But do know that you are doing the work of the Light. And now, accept its blessings." He and Calia lifted their arms, turning their faces skyward. The sun might be hidden behind clouds, but that did not mean it wasn't there, sending its life-giving rays to those who dwelled on the face of this world. It was the same with the Light, Anduin thought. It was always present even when it seemed to be far beyond one's reach. A golden glow filled the area: no explosion of blinding illumination but a gentle radiance that made Anduin's tight chest loosen as he inhaled deeply. He had been awake all night, both unable and unwilling to sleep, but as he closed his eyes and opened to the healing energy, he felt renewed, refreshed, and calm. He stepped outside just as the clouds cleared for a moment and a few lone, beautiful rays of sunshine fell upon the group as they made
their way out of the sanctum. This, too, was a blessing of the Light, though simple and mundane if something as magnificent as the sun itself could ever be called such things. Many of those present-including Anduin himself-had never been to this historic site. They were allowed to roam within the confines of the fortress, though not outside it. Anduin would put no one unnecessarily at risk by allowing them to venture too far. He believed that Sylvanas would keep her word, but neither of them had said anything about spies. He had SI:7 to observe and report; she had her Deathstalkers to do the same. Their presence was yet another reason to be concerned about Calia, and she was under strict instructions to keep her cloak's hood up every time she ventured outside an enclosed space. Most would return to the ships to sleep, though some had asked to remain inside Stromgarde Keep. Plenty of food, clean water, tents, and dry firewood had been provided for their comfort. Anduin watched them as they departed the chapel, some in groups of newly found friends, others in solitude. Some stayed behind to talk to Calia and Faol, and that made Anduin smile. Among them he noticed the passionate and headstrong young Philia, who seemed to almost palpably radiate joy at Emma, an elderly woman who had lost so many to Arthas's war against the living-a sister and her family and, even more tragically, Emma's own three sons. "Ol' Emma," as Anduin had learned some called her, was not the hardiest of women, and her mind had a tendency to wander. But she seemed alert and her color was good as she spoke first to Calia and then, cautiously, to Faol. "I have, in some ways, learned more lessons in the past several months than in a thousand years," Turalyon said, following Anduin's gaze. "There's much I have been wrong about." "Genn still thinks this is a bad idea." "He's right to worry. Sylvanas is...slippery. But no one can truly know another's heart. You have to make the best call with the information you have-and your own instincts. Genn is fueled by anger and hatred-not all the time, but often. You and I are fueled by other things."
"The Light," Anduin said quietly. "The Light, yes," Turalyon agreed. "But we should let it guide us, not command us. We also have our own minds and hearts. We should make use of those as well." Anduin said nothing. He had heard of the battles that Turalyon and Alleria had been fighting for a millennium. He knew they had been devotees of a naaru called Xe'ra, who, they thought, had epitomized what they loved best about the Light. Instead, Xe'ra had revealed herself to be stern and implacable-dangerously so. "One day soon," Anduin said at last, "I would talk to you about your experiences with the Light. But for now, I understand your words and agree with them." Turalyon nodded. "I will share what I can in the hope that it will help you be the ruler your grandfather and father were. And I will ask my son, Arator, to come to Stormwind soon. You two are very similar." "From what I hear, he's the better swordsman." Anduin grinned. "Nearly every swordsman I know says the same thing, so you're in good company." Turalyon looked up at the sky. "Still late afternoon. What are your plans?" "I'll walk with Genn. Have him tell me what he remembers of this place. It will help distract us both. Then..." He shrugged. "I don't think I'll be getting much sleep tonight." "Nor I. I seldom sleep before battle." "This isn't a battle," Anduin said, not for the first time. Turalyon regarded him kindly with warm brown eyes, a hint of a smile on his scarred visage. "Tomorrow, you, the forty-one people on the field, and everyone watching will be engaging in a battle not for property or riches but for the hearts and minds of the future," Turalyon said. "I would call that a battle, Your Majesty, and one well worth fighting."
-
That night, torches were lit along the ramparts of the old fortress,
something the walls had not seen in many years. The warm, dancing light chased away darkness but coexisted with the flickering shadows of its own creation. The night was oddly clear, and the moonlight was kind to the area. Anduin had wrapped himself in a cape and now stood looking out over the rolling landscape. Thoradin's Wall was only a slight smudge of pale stone in the distance. Anduin saw nothing moving there or in the field that stretched between the two outposts. He closed his eyes for a moment, breathing the cool, moist air. Light, you've guided and shaped me for most of my life. And since my father died, I've woken up every morning with the fate of tens of thousands of people resting on my shoulders. You have helped me bear this burden, and I have been blessed to have many wise people to rely upon. But this one's on me. It feels like the right thing to do. The bones that were shattered by the bell are easy tonight. My heart is clear, but my mind... He shook his head and said aloud, "Father, you always seemed so certain. And you acted so swiftly. I wonder if you ever doubted as I do." "No one save a madman or a child is completely free from doubt." Anduin turned, laughing a little in embarrassment. "My apologies," he said to Calia. "You stumbled upon my ramblings." "I apologize for intruding," she said. "I thought you might want company." He considered declining her offer, then said, "Stay if you like. I might not be the best companion, though." "Nor I," she admitted. "We'll be awkward together, then." Anduin chuckled. He was growing fond of Calia. At nearly forty, she was much older than he was, but she felt less like a parent figure, as Jaina had been, and more like a big sister. Was it the Light in her that made him feel so easy in her presence? Or was it simply who she was? She had been a big sister once. "Would it pain you to talk of Arthas?" he asked. "Before things... before."
"No. I loved my little brother, but few people seem to grasp that. He was not always a monster. And that little boy is how I'll always remember him." A sudden smile crossed her features. "Did you know," she said, "he was once terrible at swordplay?"
Elsie hoped that the Alliance participants in the Gathering had had a pleasant journey. It was a much longer trip for them than it was for the Forsaken. The Arathi Highlands were comparatively close, only a short flight via bat. Of course, a short flight via bat was still exciting, as she so seldom traveled anywhere other than Brill to visit some friends. She could hardly believe that the day had finally come, that this meeting was actually happening, as her bat landed and she slipped off onto the soft grass at a site named Galen's Fall. It was an apt name, as the human prince Galen Trollbane, onetime heir to the once-great kingdom of Stromgarde, had been slain on this spot years earlier by the Forsaken. Lady Sylvanas's apothecaries had raised him from death's grasp, and for a time he had served her. Then he rebelled, taking his men and declaring that he owed no allegiance to anyone other than himself and that he would restore Stromgarde to its former glory. Stromgarde Keep lay to the south; one could see it from here. It was still in ruins, and Galen had fallen twice-once as a human, once as a
Forsaken. Such, mused Elsie, is the fate of those who would defy the Banshee Queen. A Forsaken handler took the reins and fed the bat a large dead insect, which it chomped happily as it was led away. Parqual was waiting for her, his gray-green lips turned up in a smile. In his arms he held a ratty old teddy bear. "I'm glad you came," he said, "even though you don't have anyone waiting for you." "Of course I had to come," she said. "I had to see you reunite with that daughter you keep going on and on about." She nodded at the toy. "You must remember, Philia is going to be a big girl now. She might be a little old for a teddy bear. Quite a few years have passed." He chuckled. "I know, I know. I'm just so pleased she wanted to see me." He indicated the stuffed animal. "Brownie Bear here was the first toy I gave her when she was born. She was afraid she'd forget it on her trip to Stormwind, so she left it behind. It's...one of the few things of my old life that I have. And I wanted to share that with her." Elsie beamed at her friend, letting his pleasure and anticipation be hers just a little bit. She looked around contentedly. Although many on the council had met with rejection on their first-or sometimes second or third-attempts to contact the living, every member finally did find someone who would agree to come. It was going to be a memorable day. "She's not here yet," Parqual continued. "I wonder if she had second thoughts about coming." "I don't see why she would tell us she would come and then not," Elsie said. As she looked around, she noticed that Annie Lansing had a basket of sachets, flowers in full bloom, and scarves and she was allowing council members to make a selection. Annie had no jawbone, and she currently had a pretty green scarf wrapped around the lower part of her face. "Oh, that's such a nice thing Annie is doing," Elsie exclaimed. "It's going to be difficult for our loved ones to see what's happened to us. A scarf or a sachet will help." Some Forsaken had survived their time with death better than others; a gentling of their decomposition would
assist the Alliance members in seeing past the body, which had endured so much, so they could focus instead on the person. "That's a fine idea!" Parqual's face was not too disfigured, and carefully chosen trousers and a jacket covered his exposed bones. But he was aware that to the living, he might not smell particularly pleasant. "I think I'll get myself a sachet." "You'd better hurry; they look very popular!" Elsie smiled as Parqual, clutching Brownie Bear, shuffled off quickly toward the thronged Annie. Elsie turned her attention to the ramparts of the great wall and the line of archers atop them. When one of them turned around, Elsie started as she realized that these women, strong and lithe and still beautiful even in their undeath, could only be Sylvanas's elite dark rangers. They stood as still as if carved from stone, their quivers full of arrows, their bows held in one hand. Only their cloaks and their long hair moved in the breeze. Nathanos Blightcaller was atop the wall as well, talking quietly to them. He met Elsie's gaze and nodded to her. She nodded back. "There she is!" someone called, and Elsie turned. The Dark Lady was coming. Sylvanas rode atop one of the bats, her white-gold hair and glowing red eyes marking her as unmistakably as her bearing. The bat came in for a landing, and Sylvanas leaped gracefully from its back. No stiff movement of bone or sloughing skin for her. Her face was smooth, with high cheekbones, and her movements were as lithe as they had been when she yet breathed. Elsie felt an overwhelming sense of gratitude that her leader was here to support them even though Sylvanas had concerns. The fire-red gaze swept the small crowd and alighted on Elsie. "Ah, Prime Governor," Sylvanas said. "It is good to see you again. I trust that no one has forgotten the procedure I outlined for what is to come." Forgotten? Elsie had it emblazoned on her mind, and she was certain everyone else did, too. No one wanted to jeopardize future
meetings by causing anything to go wrong at today's. Sylvanas turned and pointed at the figures on the wall. "A few reminders, just in case. These archers are here for your protection. Anduin has the same number along the ramparts of Stromgarde Keep. You already know Archbishop Alonsus Faol. He and another priest will be accompanying the Alliance humans as they head toward the meeting site, which will be halfway between the fortresses. They will be moving about with you to facilitate conversations-and to monitor them." Her gaze roamed over the assembled council members. "When you engage with your Alliance counterparts, you will speak of nothing other than your past history with them. You will not discuss your existence with me in the Undercity. They will not discuss their current lives, either. Faol and the other priest have agreed that if they happen upon anyone, Forsaken or human, indulging in such conversations-or indeed anything that could smack of treason or disrespect to the other side-those parties will receive a reminder. A second time, and they will be escorted off the field. Treat the archbishop and the priest with appropriate courtesy and obey them. Dawn is almost here. Once day breaks, if we are prepared, I will sound the horn once, and you may take the field. You will have until dusk. If for any reason I deem it necessary to call a halt to the meeting, I will sound the horn again three times and erect the Forsaken banner. Should this happen, return immediately." Elsie wanted to know how immediate "immediately" was. Surely, if one wanted to express a final word of caring, or perhaps even an embrace if the Alliance member was brave enough, that was not a treasonous action. But one did not question the Dark Lady. "When the meeting has concluded, the horn will alert you that it is time to come home," Sylvanas finished. "Is that understood?" One obeyed, especially in this situation, in which misconduct or even a simple misunderstanding on either side could mean a fresh outbreak of a war that-well, no one needed that right now, certainly. So Elsie stayed silent. When the horn blew, her people would say farewell and return right away. It was clear-cut and brooked no
disagreement. There was the soft thudding of hooves on grass as one of Sylvanas's dark rangers led a bony horse to the Dark Lady. She nodded and took the reins, then returned her glowing gaze to her subjects. "I ride now to meet with the young human king. I do this for you. Because you are Forsaken. I will not be long. And then you may go forth and meet the humans who had once been part of your former life. You will see if they still have a place in your current existence." She paused, and when she spoke again, Elsie thought she heard threads of regret lacing the words. "You should prepare for great disappointment. Though they may try, the living cannot truly understand us. Only we can. Only we know. But you have asked this of me, and so I give it to you. I will return shortly." Without another word, she swung herself into the saddle and turned the skeletal horse's head. Alone, weaponless, Sylvanas Windrunner, the Dark Lady of the Forsaken, the Banshee Queen, rode to meet the king of Stormwind. Elsie had never felt prouder to be a Forsaken.
Anduin had seen Lady Sylvanas Windrunner before, of course. All the major political figures in Azeroth had assembled in the Temple of the White Tiger to witness judgment passed on Garrosh Hellscream. He suspected but did not know for certain that she had been involved with the plot against Hellscream's life. Certainly he wouldn't put it past her. Sylvanas, she who was dead and yet "lived," had no compunctions about ending the lives of others. There was no question in Anduin's mind that forbidding Genn to accompany him to this meeting had been the right thing. Greymane had proved a worthy and valuable ally, and he had been open about his affection toward Anduin. But there were some positions you just didn't put someone in. So close to the person Genn hated more than anyone in the world was one such. Anduin trusted Genn and was fond of him, but he knew that here, but a few paces away from his enemy, Genn probably would have attacked. And whether Genn died or Sylvanas did, war would have broken out at the worst possible time. Anduin did not need Shalamayne or even the more familiar mace, Fearbreaker. His weapon was the Light. And of course, Sylvanas was
deadly enough without a bow. All she needed to do was open her mouth and utter a wail, and he would perish. As he rode the white-coated Reverence along the soft earthen road toward the meeting site, a small hill midway between their respective fortresses, he saw a still-tiny shape approaching. Sylvanas was mounted on one of her unnerving skeletal steeds. Reverence's nostrils flared as he caught the scent of death and decay, but true to his name, the horse didn't falter. He was a trained war mount. Ordinary horses would be unsettled by the scent of blood or bodies. They would avoid stepping on other creatures if possible. Not warhorses. In battle, Reverence would be an extension of Anduin and an additional weapon, running down enemies and trampling them underfoot. The horse was trained to act counter to his instincts. As I have been, Anduin thought. We are both prepared to go against our natures if we must. He continued to draw closer to the Banshee Queen. He could see her more clearly now. Sylvanas had come unarmed, as he had demanded they both be. He could see her red eyes glowing beneath the hood she wore, her skin a muted blue-green not at all out of place in the somber, drizzly land, the marks under her eyes looking oddly like tear stains. She was beautiful and deadly, as beautiful and deadly as the flowers of the toxic herb Maiden's Anguish. Emotions tumbled within him at the sight: Apprehension. Hope. And at the foremost, anger. Baine had told him that Vol'jin had ordered the retreat; Sylvanas had carried it out. But had Vol'jin done so, really? Had there truly been no alternative? Had Sylvanas betrayed his father and left him and everyone on that airship to die? And if she had...should Anduin even be talking peace with her now? The words he had said so recently about Varian Wrynn, to the gathered crowd at Lion's Rest, came back to him. He knew that no one -not even a king-is more important than the Alliance. Anduin did, too. If all went well today, the Alliance could soon be safer than it ever had been. Whatever Sylvanas had or had not done, Anduin was certain that this was the right path. And sometimes the right path was a painful and dangerous one.
They came within ten feet of each other and brought their mounts to a halt. For a long moment, they simply took each other's measure. The only sounds were the soft sigh of the wind that stirred both gold and silvery hair, the stamp of Reverence's hooves, and the creak of the saddle as the great horse shifted. Sylvanas and her undead mount stayed perfectly, unnaturally still. Then, impulsively, Anduin swung himself down and took a few steps toward Sylvanas. She raised a brow. After a pause, she emulated him, walking almost languidly until they were less than a yard apart. Anduin broke the silence. "Warchief," he said, and nodded acknowledgment. "Thank you for honoring my request." "Little Lion," she said in that throaty, strangely echoing tone that the Forsaken had. The term stung more than it ought to. Aerin, the brave dwarf who had died trying to save lives, had called him that with warmth. He did not like Sylvanas twisting that memory to an insult. "King Anduin Wrynn," he said, "and not so little anymore. You would do well not to underestimate me." She smirked slightly. "You are still small enough." "I'm sure we have better use of our time than to stand here flinging insults." "I do not." She was enjoying this. He imagined that to her, he did appear small. After all, by her actions at the Broken Shore, ordered or not, she had sealed Varian's death. What was the son to her but a speck, a flea, a minor inconvenience? "Yes, you do," he said, not allowing himself to be baited. "You are the warchief of the Horde. Its members fought bravely against the Legion. And the people closest to you-the Forsaken-have asked something of you that means much to them, and you have listened." She met his gaze implacably. He had no idea if he was getting through to her. Most likely not, he thought ruefully. But that was not why he had come here today. "This is not an offer of peace," he continued. "Merely a cease-fire for a twelve-hour period."
"So you said in your letter. And I responded that I agreed to your terms. Why are we having this conversation?" "Because I wanted to see you in person," the king replied. "I want to hear from your own lips that no member of the Alliance will be harmed." She rolled her eyes. "Does your precious Light tell you if someone is lying?" "I'll know," he said simply. That wasn't exactly true. He thought he would know. He believed he would know. But he wasn't certain. The Light was not a sword. A sharp blade could always be relied on to cut flesh if the blow was struck a certain way. The Light was more nebulous. It responded to faith, not just skill. And oddly, it was because of that that he trusted it even more than Shalamayne. Something flickered on her face and then was gone. She lifted her chin slightly as she replied, "Do you not trust me to keep my word, then?" He shrugged. "You've gone back on it before." There it was. Varian's death. Sylvanas didn't reply at once. Then, almost courteously, she said, "I give you my word. As the Dark Lady of the Forsaken and as warchief of the Horde. No member of the Alliance will come to harm by any member of the Horde today. Including me. Does that satisfy you, Your Majesty?" There was an extra emphasis on the last two words. She was not showing respect by using them. She was using his new position as a not-so-subtle knife between the ribs. Because they both knew that in a better world it would have been Varian Wrynn speaking with her. And this meeting would have been less fraught with tension, resentment, and mistrust. Anduin spoke before he could stop himself. "Did you betray my father?" Sylvanas stiffened. Anduin's heart sped up, slamming against his chest. It was not a question he had intended to ask. But it was the one he needed to. He had to know. Had to know if Genn Greymane was right-if Sylvanas
had set up his father and the Alliance army to die.
-
The words were out there. Sylvanas stood motionless as a stone, her face expressionless. Her chest did not rise and fall with breath. Her heart did not pump blood. But even so, she was shocked that the boy had the courage to confront her so bluntly-and so quickly. She had not given much thought to the events of the Broken Shore. There had been so much else to seize her attention, and she was not one for rumination. But now her thoughts flew back to that bloody, chaotic moment as if she again stood on that rise, with the Alliance army below her, fighting fiercely, while the Horde gave all its mighty heart to the attack. We make our stand here, she had told the archers. And so they had, firing arrow after arrow, like a deadly rain, a storm, upon the loathed, fel-fueled enemy. And it was working. The Legion came, wave after wave of demonic monstrosities, each more horrible and horrifying than the last. But Varian's people were good. As were her own. The bellow of surprise and warning had caused her to whirl. Sylvanas had watched, stunned, as a flood of demons poured through the gap behind her. She beheld Thrall, mighty warrior and shaman, the founder of the current Horde-on his knees, his green body trembling with the simple effort of trying to get on his feet. Baine stood over him, savagely defending his friend. Shock paralyzed her for a moment. And then her warchief's words: Dey're comin' from behind! Cover da flank! The spear. That awful spear, piercing Vol'jin's torso as he shouted out his order. It should have killed him immediately, but Vol'jin was not ready to die. Not yet. Purpose fueled him. He slew his killer and continued to fight, growing weaker before her eyes. Before Sylvanas knew it, she was on her horse, riding toward her leader, scooping him up to get him off the battlefield to safety.
In what must have been an agonizing effort, the troll turned and looked up at her. He whispered the order to her, his voice too weak for others to hear over the din of furious battle. Do not let da Horde die dis day. It was a direct command from her warchief. And it was the right one. The Alliance effort below, valiant as it was, was dependent on Horde assistance. If the Horde retreated now, Varian's army would fall. But if the Horde stayed and fought, then both armies would fall. Sylvanas had closed her eyes, each option unacceptable to her, but she made the only choice she could: obeying the will of the warchief, who later would die from the poisoned spear and, to everyone's astonishment, appoint Sylvanas Windrunner as leader of the Horde. She lifted the horn to her lips and sounded the retreat. She had told no one of the regret she had felt when, standing on the stern of her ship, she beheld the green smoke of the explosion below, where Varian had fallen, and wondered if she was watching the final, excruciating moments of a mighty warrior. Sylvanas would tell no one of that now, either. But as she stood before the young king, she could see traces of his father in him that had come with the last few years. Not just physically, in Anduin's increased height and more muscled physique, or even in the strong line of a determined jaw. She saw Varian in his bearing. Did you betray my father? Later, she would question her choice in responding. But in this moment she had no desire to offer falsehood. "Varian Wrynn's destiny was set in stone, Little Lion. The Legion's numbers would have seen to that whatever choice I made that day." His blue eyes searched hers for the lie. He found none. Something about him relaxed ever so slightly. He nodded. "What happens here today benefits both the Horde and the Alliance. I am glad you have agreed to honor this cease-fire. I hereby swear to you that I, too, will abide by it, and no member of the Horde will come to harm by any Alliance hand this day." He inclined his head in
acknowledgment as he mirrored her words, adding, "Including mine." "Then we have nothing more to say." He shook his golden head. "No, we don't. And I regret that. Perhaps another day we will meet again and speak of other things that could help both our peoples." Sylvanas allowed herself a small smile. "I doubt that very much." Without another word, Sylvanas turned, offering him a clear shot at her back, leaped into the saddle of her undead steed, and galloped down the path the way she had come.
Despite the harsh words from the Horde leader as she left, Anduin felt hopeful. He believed her...Legion forces had been appearing everywhere, Genn had told him. If Horde soldiers had been surprised on that ridge, and Anduin believed Baine's report that they had, it was not unreasonable to suppose that remaining there would have doomed them-and the Alliance. He had thought he would never know the real, full story. But if things went well today and in future such encounters, then perhaps many questions could be answered-and not just his. A squire stepped forward and took Reverence's reins as the king slipped from the horse's back. "You're back in one piece," Genn observed. "Don't sound so disappointed," Anduin joked. "It went well, then," Turalyon said. Anduin sobered as he regarded the paladin. He was as much a personal hero to the young king as Faol was. Turalyon loved a woman who skirted the line between the Void and the Light, whose sister was the one with whom he had just met.
"Yes," he said. "It did." He made a decision on the spot. "I asked her about Father," he told Genn. "She said there was nothing she could have done to save him. And I believe her." "Of course she would say that," Genn scoffed. "Anduin..." He shook his head. "Sometimes you are simply too naive. I fear that something is going to come along and beat that out of you one of these days." "I'm not naive. This...felt true." Genn continued to scowl, but Turalyon nodded. "I understand." Anduin stepped between them, clapping each of them on a shoulder. "Let's begin. There are people anxious to be with their families." "I'll tell the priests to stand ready by the gryphons," Turalyon said. May they be needed only for blessings, Anduin thought but did not say. Aloud, he said only, "Thank you, Turalyon." He moved forward, looking at the nineteen people who stood waiting. On their faces were expressions of apprehension and excitement. Their king understood both emotions completely. "It is time," he said. "May today be a day of change. Of connection. Of hope and looking forward to a day where reuniting with loved ones becomes a commonplace occurrence rather than a historic one. You'll be watched and will be protected." They had been blessed by two priests already, but this benediction would be from their king. He lifted his hands and called down the Light upon those gathered. Eyes closed. Lips turned up in soft smiles, and he could feel calmness settle on those present. Including himself. "Light be with you," Anduin said. He looked first at Archbishop Faol, who put a hand on his unbeating heart and bowed, and then at Calia, who had stayed up with him all night distracting him with stories. She smiled, her eyes shining. This moment was as much for them as it was for the active participants. He nodded to Turalyon, who bowed his head, and waved to Genn Greymane. Anduin's chief adviser's glower had not lifted since their arrival, but he nodded now and shouted orders. What remained of the enormous wooden doors creaked and shuddered open. Anduin recalled his conversation with Turalyon. The
paladin had said that they would all be battling "not for property or riches but for the hearts and minds of the future." For a moment, the group simply stood. Then one of them-Philia- shouldered her way through the crowd and began striding forward boldly, her body straight, her jaw set, her booted feet traveling swiftly over the green sward. As if it was a signal the others had been awaiting, they started moving, too, some with quicker paces than others. No one was allowed to break into a run lest someone mistake haste for danger. But they flowed out of the gate and toward the cluster of shapes that were now coming out of Thoradin's Wall. Over the sounds of conversation, a happy laugh rang out, sounding kind and strangely hollow. It was Archbishop Faol. And suddenly Anduin found joyful tears stinging his eyes. You led the Army of the Light, Turalyon, Anduin thought, and his heart lifted. But this is the army of hope.
-
Ol' Emma kept wondering if this was truly happening or if it was just one of her daydreams. She decided that the pain in her joints as she walked across the soft grass, at a much more rapid pace than usual, proved that it was indeed a reality. Emma walked a great deal on a daily basis, carrying water back from the well to her small, tidy home, so endurance was not the problem. Speed was. She wanted so badly to be like Philia and all but run toward the center of the field, but her age would not permit her. She told herself that Jem, Jack, and Jake doubtless had learned patience in their time as undead. They could wait a few more moments to see her. She was the one who didn't want to wait. Someone fell in step beside her. He carried a beautifully crafted helm and introduced himself as Osric Strang. "I'm Emma Felstone," Emma said. "That looks mighty heavy." Osric, a powerfully muscled man with red hair and a beard, laughed.
"Heavy enough to do its job. I made this for the-the person I'm going to see today. Tomas was like a brother to me. We used to argue over who made the best armor, when we served as guards-him in Lordaeron, me in Stormwind. I thought him lost forever that horrible day." Osric gestured to the helm. "I thought if he'd survived being turned into a Forsaken with his brain intact, I'd better do what I could to keep it that way." He smiled down at her. "Who are you going to see?" "My boys," Emma replied. She could hear the smile in her voice. "All three of them. They were in Lordaeron when..." She couldn't finish. Osric regarded her with deep sympathy. "I'm...I'm so sorry you lost them. But I'm very glad they joined the council so you can see them again." "Oh, I am, too," Emma said. "You have to focus on what you have, don't you?" "That you do." The armorer shifted the helm to the crook of one arm and extended the other to Emma. "It can be a bit tricky walking over this terrain. Hang on to me." Such a good boy, she thought as she gratefully did so. Just like mine. The meeting site-exactly midway between Stromgarde Keep and Thoradin's Wall-had been prepared for the event. There were two tables, one on each side. One was where the Horde could put gifts for the Alliance, and the other was where the Alliance could place their own gifts. Osric walked up to the Alliance table and set down the helm, then rejoined Emma. The priestess who had interviewed them smiled winningly beneath her hood at the assembled participants, then asked them to form a long line facing their Horde counterparts. Earlier, the weather had been damp and cold, the sky overcast. Now, though, the clouds were disappearing and sunlight peeked out. As everyone moved into position, Emma looked about anxiously for her sons. With a pang of worry, she wondered if she would even be able to recognize them. Although she had met Archbishop Faol, Emma wasn't fully prepared for how bad some of the Forsaken looked.
No one would mistake them for living beings, and the sunlight was not kind to them. Bones jutted through gray-green skin. Their eyes glowed eerily, and they hunched and shuffled as they walked. Well, she told herself. My skin is all wrinkled, and I sometimes hunch and shuffle, too. There was a long silence. Archbishop Faol moved forward. "If you wish to leave now, you may do so," he said in that strange but pleasant voice. At first no one moved, but then Emma saw about four or five humans, their faces shocked and almost as gray as those of the Forsaken, turn and hasten back toward the keep. One of those who had been rebuffed cried out after a departing figure in a hollow voice that held a world of sorrow. The others stood for a moment, then turned and began the long walk the way they had come, their heads bowed. Oh, those poor things, Emma thought. "Anyone else?" Faol inquired. There were none. "Excellent. When I call your name, please step forward to me. You'll be joined by your loved one, and you may then roam the field together freely." He unrolled a parchment and read. "Emma Felstone!" Emma's heart surged. To Osric, she queried in a shaking voice, "Is it time for me to see them now? After so long?" "If you like," said the priestess. "If you don't, you can return to the keep." Emma shook her head. "Oh, no. No, no. I won't disappoint them like those other folks." Osric patted her hand reassuringly; and Emma pulled away, straightened, and made her way unaided to where Faol stood. "Jem, Jack, and Jake Felstone," the archbishop called. Three tall Forsaken stepped forward from their own line, advancing hesitantly. Emma stared at them as they approached. They had all been so large and fit in life. Such strong young men. How confident they had been, how proud to serve Lordaeron. Now they were but skin and bones and limp clotted hair. It took her a moment to read their expressions.
Her sons, once laughing and confident, looked...frightened. They are more afraid here, in front of me, than on a battlefield, Emma realized. And then all the differences between her and them suddenly didn't matter. She started to weep even though she felt her mouth curve in an enormous smile. "My boys," she said. "Oh, my boys!" "Mama!" Jack said, lurching toward her. "We've missed you so much!" Jem said. And Jake simply bowed his head, overcome with the moment. Then, all three of the Forsaken bent to embrace their mother.
-
Thank you, Calia said to the Light as she watched the matriarch of the reunited family shed tears of joy. Thank you for this. She listened, smiling, as other names were called. They stepped forward, hesitant or joyful. Some simply shook their heads and, unable to take the final steps now that the moment had come, returned in silence, leaving their Forsaken loved ones standing alone until they, too, turned away and went back to the wall. Calia prayed for them: the ones who had refused and the ones who had been rebuffed. All were hurting. All needed the Light's blessing. But there were surprisingly few of them. Most of the reunions were cautious at first: stilted, awkward. But that was all right, too. "Philia Fintallas," read the archbishop. Philia was in the very forefront, and she had spotted her father, Parqual, already. At the sound of her name, she ran right up to him, shouting, "Papa!" These two needed no urging or mediating. They hastened to each other, stopping just short of touching, and both wore smiles as large as Calia's heart felt. "It's really you," Philia said, putting so much into the single word. After the first few reintroductions, things flowed much more smoothly and swiftly. Not all the reunions were as joyful and easy as
others, but they were talking. Forsaken and human were talking. Who could ever have believed this moment would happen? One man-one king-had. And if this could happen, perhaps more could, too. More events that should have happened but that Arthas had so tragically destroyed. There is such a thing as a new beginning, she thought. For all of us. Faol stepped beside her. "These eyes have seen so much pain. How delightful, after everything that has happened, that they can still behold this." "Do you think there will be another gathering?" Calia asked. "I hope so, but that rests entirely with Sylvanas. Perhaps even she will find she still has a heart, just as these people have." "We can hope," Calia said. "Yes, indeed," Faol replied. "We can always hope."
Sylvanas Windrunner stood on the top of the ancient wall. Nathanos, as always, was beside her. Her gaze was fixed on the scene unfolding in the distance. "It seems to be going without incident," Sylvanas said. "Any reason to believe it is not?" "None that I have learned, my queen," Nathanos said. "Although I see that some of the humans have scorned interaction with those whose hopes they had raised," she said. "That was cruel of them." "It was," Nathanos agreed. He offered nothing more. "I was reluctant to agree to this gathering, but perhaps this is a good thing. Now my Forsaken begin to understand how they are perceived even by those who once claimed to love them." "You were wise to have permitted it, my queen. Let them see for themselves what the situation is. If it is painful to them, they will not wish to repeat the experience. If it is joyful to them, you have something to hold over them to keep them obedient. Not," he added, "that there was ever much to fear from this group."
"It was good for me to witness this. I have learned much from it." "Will you repeat it?" Sylvanas squinted up at the sun. "The day is young yet. I am not done observing. Nor will I relax my vigilance. Varian's whelp likes to appear as though he is utterly without guile, but he may be shrewder than we give him credit for. He could have planned an attack on his own people with an eye to blaming us for it. Then he would be seen as a strong leader to declare war on us. The ultimate protector of the helpless." "It is possible, my queen." She gave him one of her rare, wry smiles. "But you think otherwise." "With respect, such a thing sounds more like a strategy you would employ," he said. "It does," she said. "But not today. We are not prepared for a war." She glanced at the rangers she had positioned atop the wall. Their quivers were full, their bows strapped to their backs within easy reach. They would attack the instant she told them to. Sylvanas smiled.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD Parqual and Philia had wandered over to the Forsaken exchange table. Elsie watched them happily as Parqual pointed at an old, tattered teddy bear, and tears streamed down the girl's face. "I want to hold Brownie," Elsie heard her say. "I want to hold you, Papa." "Oh, my little one, or not so little one," he chuckled, "Brownie is off limits till your king says it's safe. And as for me, my skin can't handle those bear hugs I remember." Philia wiped her face. "Can I hold your hand if I do it gently?" People thought that because Forsaken flesh was dead, it was limited in what it could communicate. Nothing could be further from the truth. A myriad of expressions crossed Parqual's face: joy, love, fear, hope. "If you like, child," he said. Forsaken came in all stages of death: freshly slain, partially rotting, almost mummified. Parqual was the last of these even though he'd been so determined to have a sachet tucked in his pocket, and Elsie wanted to hug them both as he extended his withered, parchmentfragile hand and placed it in his daughter's smooth, living one. Elsie wanted to linger with Parqual and Philia to savor the reunion of parent and child. But there were others, who found themselves at a loss for words or didn't know how to react and might appreciate someone to help. These two would be all right. They had come with love and trepidation in their hearts. But they also had come with something else: hope. "Mother?" The voice belonged to Jem, the oldest of the Felstone boys. He sounded upset. Elsie looked around for him. She found him with Jack and Jake, forming a ring around their tiny mother; then one of them stepped aside, looking around for aid. Elsie saw that their mother, Emma, was ashen and seemed to be
having difficulty breathing. "Priestess!" one of them cried, his sepulchral voice tinged with fear. "Please, help her!" The cloaked woman hastened over and lifted a hand. The Light came to her, called down as if from the sun itself, and she sent it toward the mother. The older woman gasped softly. Her pale face warmed to a humanly healthy pink hue, and she blinked, looking around for the woman who had healed her. Their eyes met, and the priestess smiled. "Thank you so much," Elsie said. "It's an honor to be here," the priestess replied. "Pardon me, I couldn't help but notice that you're standing alone. Did your meeting not go well?" Her face was largely in shadow, but Elsie saw that her smile was kind. "Oh, my dear, you're so sweet," Elsie said. "I'm fine. I'm just here to share my council's joy." The priestess gasped softly, and she moved toward Elsie. "You must be Prime Governor Benton," she said. She reached for the Forsaken woman's hands. "I heard about Wyll. I'm so sorry." Elsie started to draw back, then paused. Surely someone Faol trusted to assist him would not find Elsie's leathery, cold appendages horrifying. The priestess took them in hers very carefully, already aware, as brave young Philia was just discovering, that one had to be gentle with the Forsaken. Their flesh was so very fragile. And yet, as Elsie had observed, most of them seemed starved for physical contact. The priestess's hands were soft and warm. The touch felt so pleasant. Then she released Elsie's hands but stayed near. "Thank you," Elsie said. "The archbishop has been so kind to us. We're grateful that you and he are here with all of us today." "I am happier to be here than you know," the human woman assured her. "I wanted to make sure I found you to thank you for being so willing to work with us. Know that King Anduin deeply regrets that he can't thank you in person." Elsie waved a dismissive hand. "This isn't a safe place for a human king to be. He's got to think about his people. I owe him a debt I can
never repay. He was with my Wyll as he passed, when I couldn't be. And I will tell you, Wyll loved those Wrynn boys like they were his own." The two women stood together, watching the event continue to unfold. Here and there they heard the sound of laughter. They smiled at each other. "This is a good thing," Elsie said. "A very good thing." "His Majesty hopes that if all goes well today, your warchief might be agreeable to another such meeting at a later time." Elsie's smile faded slightly. "I do not believe that will happen," the Prime Governor said. "But then again, I never believed it would happen at all. So it shows you what I know, I suppose." She chuckled. "If there is a second Gathering," the priestess continued, "King Anduin wants to meet you." "Oh, my, wouldn't that be lovely!" Elsie glanced back toward the keep. It was far enough away that she couldn't distinguish faces, but it would appear that the young king was not shy about letting himself be seen. He stood wearing his distinctive armor draped with a blue tabard bearing the golden lion of Stormwind. The bright shafts of sunlight seemed to seek him out, to catch the gleam of his armor and his golden hair. "Queen Tiffin was such a beauty. And so kind," Elsie mused. "Anduin has her hair. 'A boy of sunshine,' Wyll called him. No one knew then, back when I still breathed, that the boy of sunshine would one day be a king of the Light!" As they watched, another stepped up beside the king of Stormwind: tall, powerfully built, with white hair. "Who's that gentleman?" Elsie asked. For a moment, a deeper shadow passed over the priestess's face. "That's King Genn Greymane of Gilneas," she said. "Oh, dear," Elsie said. "I imagine he's not too happy about all this." "He may not be," the priestess replied. "But he's standing beside his king, and he's watching us." She lifted her arm. "You might not be able to meet King Anduin, but
you can wave to him," she told Elsie. Hesitantly, Elsie imitated her. At first, her movements were small and shy, but when Anduin saw them and returned the gesture, pleasure rushed through her and she waved more vigorously. Unsurprisingly, Greymane did not join in. But that was all right. He was there. Perhaps he would see something today that would move him. "Imagine me, Elsie Benton, waving hello to a king!" she murmured. And when Anduin bowed to her, the Prime Governor of the Desolate Council laughed brightly in surprise.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, THORADIN'S WALL Sylvanas made a point of speaking with each of the council members who had returned, angry and disillusioned, to the wall. She was both sorrowful and satisfied as she spoke to them. "I feared this very thing would happen," she told them. "You understand now, do you not?" They did. The gulf between human and Forsaken could not be bridged. Sylvanas felt particularly vindicated when Annie Lansing, who had labored to create sachets and scarves to make the Forsaken more appealing to the humans, trudged slowly back. "You went to so much effort to please them," Sylvanas said. "I thought if they weren't distracted by what we looked like...what we smelled like...they could truly see us," Annie replied sadly. "Truly see me." "Who was it?" There was a pause. "My mother." "A mother's love is supposed to be unconditional," Sylvanas said. "Apparently it isn't," Annie said bitterly. She unwound the scarf, and Sylvanas gazed unflinchingly into her maimed face. "We should have listened to you, Dark Lady. We were terribly wrong." The words were sweet as honey. Sweet as victory. The council would be divided, and the conflict among its members would destroy it. And Sylvanas hadn't had to do a thing. Sylvanas ascended the wall with quick, lithe steps and pulled out her spyglass. With any luck, she would see more newly enlightened Forsaken returning back where they belonged. Where was the Prime Governor in the midst of all this? Was she shaken by the attrition? Sylvanas found her. And all her satisfaction evaporated. Vellcinda stood easily and comfortably next to the cloaked and hooded priestess Faol had brought with him. The Prime Governor looked toward the keep, upward, to someone atop it. And then she waved.
Quickly Sylvanas moved the spyglass, the images it revealed to her veering about madly until they lit upon the figure of Stormwind's king. Anduin, smiling, was waving back. As Sylvanas watched, fury boiling inside her, he put his hand on his heart and bowed. Bowed. To Vellcinda Benton, the Prime Governor of the Desolate Council. Sylvanas opened her mouth to order the retreat. But no. Not yet. This was not enough to convict Vellcinda in the eyes of the council. Sylvanas needed to tread carefully. To Nathanos she said, "I want someone watching Vellcinda at all times. And," she added, "I want that priestess watched, too."
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD She laughs like a little girl. Almost like a living thing. Calia's heart was full, so full. She tried to burn this moment into her mind so that she would remember it when she woke with achingly empty arms from the nightmares that still haunted her dreams. When she would hear ugly words uttered by both sides of Azeroth's seemingly endless war between Horde and Alliance. She would remember standing in this field while the grown boy of sunshine waved to the woman whose husband had tended him his whole life. She would remember this day and all its gifts, as the day when everything began to change. "I did bring something for him to give to Wyll wherever they buried him." Elsie patted her chest, touching a simple golden ring that hung from a chain around her neck. "I want to wear it until the last possible moment, and then I'll put it on the table. It's my wedding ring. I wore it till the day I died...and after, too, until I just couldn't." She indicated her bony fingers. "It becomes hard to keep rings on. Or fingers, for that matter. But I kept this. I'd be so grateful if you made sure it reaches the king." The priestess stared at the ring and thought of her family. Of her child, whom she imagined as having grown up to be like Philia: brave and loyal and kind. Of her own husband, who had kept her secret and loved her for who she was. Of all the people of Lordaeron, who didn't deserve what had happened to them and who had struggled on bravely. Of every one of those on the field today, brave enough to look past outer ugliness to an inner beauty, or, conversely, brave enough to overcome their fear of rejection and see loved ones again as such, not as the enemy. Of Philia, who wanted to hug her father. Of Emma and her sons, reunited in a mother's twilight years. Of the untold numbers of people just like them, on both sides, yearning to be united.
Of her brother, who was responsible for all the pain, all the loss. A Menethil had done this. A Menethil would have to fix it.
For several long moments Anduin stood watching, a smile playing about his lips. He recalled his first experience with the Conclave, how it felt to be walking into a place of complete safety, to see races that might otherwise be slitting one another's throats laughing together, or discussing philosophies, or researching, or simply sitting side by side in quiet, joyful coexistence. And now similar scenes were unfolding beneath him, but ones of possibly even greater import to the future of Azeroth. He watched Calia, who had hidden in a ditch for two days while enraged mindless creatures swarmed and searched above her, move about the crowd, speaking to small groups and blessing them. He'd watched her heal Emma, whose reunion with not one but all three of her sons had been almost more than she could handle. He'd watched Parqual and Philia respond joyfully and freely to each other, as if death had not separated them at all. Calia was too far away for Anduin to make out her expression, but she lifted her arm and waved. Standing beside the priestess was a Forsaken woman who appeared not to have an Alliance family
member. Glancing at Calia, she, too, lifted her arm and waved to the king of Stormwind. This had to be the Prime Governor, Elsie Benton. Anduin couldn't suppress a grin as he waved back and impulsively gave a quick bow. "That's not how you pat yourself on the back." Anduin laughed and turned to Genn, clapping the older man on the shoulder. "I confess, I might want to do a little back patting. But I think the congratulations belongs to them. Those down there. The courage it had to have taken for any of them to be willing to do this... it's almost unfathomable." He expected an irritated retort. Instead, Genn Greymane was silent, as if seriously considering Anduin's words. And that, Anduin thought, was a victory right there.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD Philia had believed that her father as he was now would not be too different from the man she'd loved so much. She was discovering as they spoke and ambled around the field together that she was both wrong and right. Parqual's appearance, especially up close, had shocked her initially. For a brief moment, though she would never tell him, horror and disgust had closed her throat and urged her body to flee. But then he had smiled. And it was her papa's smile. Different-oh, yes. Changed beyond imagining. But he was still himself. Some things he had forgotten, and that pained her. But in many ways, he was still so much himself that she could scarcely believe it. At one point, they were chatting happily about history, a topic about which they were both passionate. Without thinking, Philia blurted out, "Oh, Papa, you should write about Arthas and what happened that day!" Horrified, she put a hand to her mouth as her father turned very still. "I'm so sorry," she said. "I shouldn't have-" "No, it's all right," Parqual replied quickly. "It's something that I've thought about. A firsthand account. Primary sources are the most important, you know." Philia did know, and she smiled slightly. "I never did, because everyone who would read it already has their own firsthand account. But now..." The possibilities. "Papa-you could write it, and we could share it with the Alliance! We only know rumors and whispers. You could let us all know what really happened!" He looked at her sadly. "I don't think our Dark Lady will permit a second meeting, my dear." Philia felt as though her heart had plunged to her toes. "Is...is this
our only chance to see each other?" "It may well be." She shook her head. "No. No, I won't accept that. I've only just found you again, Papa. I won't lose you a second time. There has to be a way!" Philia expected more sad denials, but instead her father was silent. His lambent gaze was not on her but on the woman who had been pointed out as the leader of the Desolate Council. Elsie Benton stood now with the human priestess who had been so kind to the Forsaken. As if feeling his gaze, the priestess turned her head and looked at Parqual. "I think we may have found that way," Parqual murmured. Gently, he placed a hand on his daughter's back. "Come. There are people I would like you to meet."
-
Calia continued to keep her eyes on the field as she spoke with Elsie. It looked as though all those who remained were having positive conversations with their loved ones. She heard laughter and saw smiles. This is how it should be. The people of Lordaeron haven't been free to be who or what they wish to be. For this moment, they are. There was Osric, talking to his friend Tomas. Over there, two sisters were reunited. There was Ol' Emma, whom Calia had healed, looking ten years younger as she smiled at her children. And Parqual and Philia were coming to join them. They spoke for a few moments; Calia was too far away to hear what they said. Parqual said something to his daughter, then headed alone toward Calia. She felt a flicker of concern; he shouldn't be approaching her like this. No one was supposed to know that she and Parqual knew each other. Loudly, he said, "Priestess...may this Forsaken have your blessing?" "Of course," she replied. He bent his head, whispering to her, "We need you now. It's time."
"Wh-what?" "You'll see. Be ready." Calia steadied herself and called for the Light's blessing. It came, bathing him in its warm, gold-white glow. Parqual grimaced; the Holy Light healed Forsaken, but it was not pleasant for them. With a nod of appreciation, he turned and rejoined the group. She watched them, alert now. For a while, they simply chatted. And then, too casually, Philia and Parqual walked away from the Felstones. After a moment, the Felstone family, too, began to walk. Slowly and indirectly, so as not to attract too much attention, they were moving from the center of the field toward Stromgarde Keep. Saa'ra's words rushed back to Calia so swiftly that she staggered. There are things you must do before that peace will be granted to you. Things that you must understand, that you must integrate into yourself. People who need your help. What one needs in order to heal will always come one's way, but sometimes it is hard to recognize it. Sometimes, the most beautiful and important gifts come wrapped in pain and blood. Was this the moment she had been thinking of ever since she had found her way to the Netherlight Temple and Archbishop Faol? So much had fallen into place so perfectly: the Desolate Council, Anduin's noble call for this gathering. And now, spontaneously, human and Forsaken had taken a step so courageous that Calia felt both inspired and ashamed. Yes. Parqual was right. It was time. She whirled toward Elsie, her hood falling off with her movement. "Elsie, there's something you must know. And I pray to the Light that has sent me here this day that you will understand-and support it." She swallowed hard. "Support...me."
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, THORADIN'S WALL "Something is wrong," Sylvanas murmured. "But I cannot put my finger on precisely what." The priestess had said something to Vellcinda that had the Prime Governor agitated. No one else on the field seemed to notice. They were too busy taking strolls with their loved ones. And that was it. "They're defecting," Sylvanas snapped. Nathanos was instantly alert, scanning the field with his spyglass. "Several of them are moving in the direction of Stromgarde Keep," he confirmed, "but that may not be intentional." "Let's find out," Sylvanas said. She lifted the horn to her lips and blew three long, clear notes. Now to see who comes when called-and who breaks and runs. At that moment, one of the priests returned, urging her bat to go as quickly as it could. She looked shocked and sickened. "My lady!" she gasped. "The priestess-I didn't recognize her until her hood fell off-I can scarce believe it-" "Spit it out," Sylvanas snarled, her body taut as a bowstring. "My lady-it's Calia Menethil!" Menethil. The name was laden, heavy with meaning and portent. It was the name of the monster who had made her. Who had slaughtered and destroyed. It was the name of the king who had ruled Lordaeron. And it was the name of that king's daughter-his heir. And to think she had thought the king of Stormwind an ingenuous fool. He played politics better than she could possibly have imagined. Anduin Wrynn had brought a usurper with him. And now, that girl, that damned human child who ought to be long dead, was taking Sylvanas's own people to join the Alliance.
"My lady, what are your orders?"
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD In the center of the field, Elsie stared at the queen of Lordaeron. "It's not possible," she said. But she knew it was true. Calia had taken care to keep her face hidden in the shadow of her hood. But now the hood was gone and she had turned to look directly at Elsie, and Elsie could not look away. "You are my people, and I want to help you," Calia pleaded. "I only came to observe, to begin to get to know the Forsaken of Lordaeron." "Undercity," Elsie said. "We live in the Undercity." "You didn't once. You won't have to live in the shadows anymore. Just-please. Come walk with me. Parqual, the Felstones, all the others-see them? They're defecting. Anduin will shelter and protect you all; I know he will!" "But-the Dark Lady-" As if in response, the horn sounded three sharp blasts. Elsie turned her gray-green face back toward the wall and the Forsaken banner that had been unfurled. "I'm sorry, Your Majesty," Elsie said. "I can't betray my queen. Not even for you." She turned and shouted, "Retreat! Retreat!"
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, STROMGARDE KEEP Anduin heard the sound of the horn. Baffled, he looked down, trying to ascertain what had caused it. As far as he could see, nothing had changed from a moment- He pressed his lips closed to prevent a groan from escaping. There was sudden deep, dull pain inside him. "What's wrong, son?" Genn asked sharply. "It is the bell," Velen said somberly, sadly. Turalyon looked confused, but Greymane's face went hard. He knew about the bell. About the warning it meant to his young king. "The retreat," Anduin managed, grimacing as the pain increased. "It's dangerous." A second pain struck Anduin, different but even more devastating to him. For this was not the bone-hurting ache of the Divine Bell's handiwork but the knife-sharp pain of a dream shattering before his eyes. With a sick jolt, Anduin saw that the tiny figures who had stood at attention on Thoradin's Wall were now mounted on bats and flying toward the field. Dark rangers. "It's over," he whispered, and leaned on the parapet. "Get them to safety before it's too late!" On the field below, spread out like markers in the map room, were other tiny figures. Some of them were heading back toward Thoradin's Wall. Some were returning to the keep. And some still stood in the field as if paralyzed. The pain wasn't abating, and Anduin clenched his jaw against it as he looked back at the wall. He forced his fisted hands to open and lifted the spyglass. His mind saw things with a strange, swift clarity, and he immediately picked out Archbishop Faol and Calia. The former was close to the wall, urging his charges to rush through the gates to safety. But Calia stayed in the field, arguing with Elsie Benton. The priestess's
hood was down. Calia...what are you doing? Calia turned away from the Prime Governor, ran forward a few paces, cupped her hands around her mouth, and shouted, "Forsaken! I am Calia Menethil! Head for the keep!" "What is that girl doing?" shouted Genn. But Anduin was not listening. His gaze was riveted on the pair of women in the field, one human, one Forsaken, and at that moment Elsie Benton dropped like a stone with a black-fletched arrow protruding from her chest. Calia turned back toward Elsie, but she was too late. A look of horror was on her face, but there was nothing she could do now for the murdered Prime Governor. Calia shouted again, "To the keep! Run!" Anduin jerked back, his mind reeling. Now he saw that everyone, humans and Forsaken both, had broken into a run. Sylvanas had moved to the offensive, just like that. Right under their watchful eyes. And he, Anduin Wrynn, had put innocent unarmed civilians directly in her path. The only way to correct his terrible mistake was to do everything he could to save them, even if it meant starting a war. But even with that thought, the pain did not ebb. Everyone was shouting at him, asking for orders, telling him one thing while someone else was screaming another. But Anduin couldn't hear any of them. He knew that he needed to listen to what this strange, contradictory gift of the Divine Bell had to say to him. He squeezed his eyes shut and pleaded silently, Light, what is happening? What can I do? The answer came. It was swift, blunt, and brutal. Protect. And mourn. "No," he whispered, protesting even as he accepted the words. His eyes snapped open. Genn was raging at him. "-got to get our soldiers out there and-"
"-stand ready to defend our people by-" It was Turalyon, radiant with the Light. Anduin couldn't speak, but he nodded to Turalyon that he should proceed. Bats swooped and darted over the field, their riders showering it with black lines. Each one struck its target. And Anduin understood. "Genn," he said, his voice a harsh rasp. "Genn-she's killing them. She's killing them all." Sylvanas Windrunner had kept her word. Her rangers were not attacking humans. They were attacking Forsaken. Even those who were returning to the wall. This is wrong, he thought. And I am wrong for standing here. He made his decision, and the pain ebbed at once. "Whatever happens"-he called over his shoulder, racing toward the one remaining gryphon left-"do not attack the rangers unless they attack us. Is that clear? I need your word!" "You have it," Turalyon stated. Anduin wondered if the paladin had some inkling of what he was about to do or if he was simply being a good soldier. Genn, however, could never be counted on simply to obey without protest. "What are you planning?" he demanded. "These aren't your people. They're hers! She'll kill you, boy!" Anduin was about to find out.
For a ghastly moment, the slaughter around Calia Menethil overlapped and blended with the memory of those two terrifying days years ago when she had lain motionless in a ditch while crazed undead rampaged only a few feet away. She was frozen and could only watch in horror as the dark rangers of Sylvanas Windrunner loosed arrows upon the members of the Desolate Council. They had come with no hatred in their hearts for Sylvanas. These were only people who wanted to see friends and family they thought were forever beyond their reach. But their warchief, their own Dark Lady, she who had made them and above all others should be safeguarding their well-being, had ordered her rangers to shoot into their midst. They aren't even armed, Calia's mind said stupidly, as if that were the most important thing in this horrifying betrayal. They had brought only rings and love letters and toys onto this field. They wanted nothing other than kindness and connection. I didn't mean for this to happen, she thought. But that didn't matter. Nor did it matter that the initial idea to seek sanctuary with
the Alliance had come from Parqual. They would have been her people had they lived, and they were her people in undeath, too. And she would not scurry to safety like a coward while her people were being butchered by a jealous usurper queen for daring to race toward what they believed to be a sanctuary. She was Calia Menethil. Heir to the throne of Lordaeron. And she would fight-and die-to defend her people. She just had to get them safely to Stromgarde Keep and maintain a barrier of Light between them and the arrows that continued to claim them. "To the keep!" she shouted. "Run!" And she hastened to do whatever she could to shield her people from the false queen's rage.
ARATHI HIGHLANDS, THORADIN'S WALL "My queen, what are you doing?" Sylvanas heard the shock in her normally calm champion's voice. She chose to overlook it. On the surface, what was unfolding below- the firing of arrows, the screams and pleas of the Desolate Council as they tasted their Last Deaths could seem perplexing and disturbing. "The only thing I can do and still hang on to my kingdom as it is," she said. "They were defecting." "Some were running back here, to safety," he replied. "They were," she agreed. "But how much of that was fear? How tempted were they until that point?" She shook her head. "No, Nathanos. I cannot take the risk. The only Desolate Council members I trust are the ones who returned to me early on, broken and bitter. Truly Desolate. All the others...I cannot allow that sentiment, that hope, to grow. It is an infection ready to spread. I have to cut it out." Slowly, accepting her words, he nodded. "You are letting the humans go." "I have no wish to fight a war when I'm not ready to do so." She gazed at the growing number of motionless Forsaken corpses on the field. So many had opted for death. "I don't think the boy king arranged this. It was stupid. He is naive, but he is not stupid. He would not risk war for a handful of Forsaken merchants and laborers." Her initial suspicion had evaporated quickly. If he had intended this defection, he would have planned better for it. No, Sylvanas placed the blame on the Menethil girl, as reckless and deceitful as her loathed brother. She had gulled both the king of Stormwind and the warchief of the Horde. And she was about to die for it. "I grow tired of the game," Sylvanas said. "I will kill the usurper myself. And then the Forsaken will return home, where they belong. With me."
She gave her champion a cold smile. "One of the Desolate Council's desires was not to be reborn again and again. So I have given them two gifts today. A reunion with their loved ones and their final deaths. "And now," she said, grasping her bow and leaping lightly atop a waiting bat, "I am about to consign Calia Menethil to the annals of history's dead royalty."
ARATHI HIGHLANDS FIELD Anduin prayed to the Light as he never had before. These people- both human and Forsaken-had done nothing but try to see past their old hatred, their fear. They had reached out in love and in trust- -trust in me- -to do what was right, and good, and kind. Even as he urged the gryphon on to his greatest speed, he realized with a sick, sinking horror that he would be too late. Up ahead, Osric Strang ran beside his friend Tomas. The young king reached for the Light, but before he could release it upon the running Forsaken, an arrow sang past his ear and implanted itself in Tomas's bony chest. It went clear through, piercing the spine with inhuman precision. No... Anduin glanced around wildly. There was Philia, with her father, Parqual, running with her arm around him protectively, as if she were the parent, not he. But the arrows of the dark rangers were as merciless as those who fired them. They struck true, and Parqual tumbled in midstride. Philia fell to her knees, her arms going around the decaying body and her sobs ripping Anduin to shreds. He could reach none of them in time. Not even any of the Felstone boys, who were running toward the keep as fast as their long legs could go. One of them cradled the frightened, elderly Emma in his arms, trying to shield her with his own body, not understanding that he and his undead brothers were the ones in danger, not their mother. Three arrows sang. Three arrows reached their targets. Three bodies toppled to the ground, their mother hitting the earth hard and crying out their names. The other Forsaken on this lethal field were much too far away. Anduin knew he could not save them. But he could save Emma. He brought the gryphon down and jumped off his back, gathering
up the weeping woman and calling to the Light. She has lost them all, now. Please, give her hope as well as healing. Her boys would want her to live. Emma's eyelids fluttered. She opened them and gazed up at him. Her eyes were swollen with tears. "All of them," she said. "I know," Anduin said. "And you must live for all of them, since they cannot." He lifted her-she was so light, so frail-and eased her atop the gryphon. "He'll take you back safely." She nodded, summoning her courage, and held on tightly as the beast gathered himself and ascended into a sky crowded with bats and gryphons bearing dark rangers and priests. Despite the provocation, Anduin's priests had not attacked, for which Anduin was grateful. Sylvanas Windrunner had killed her own people. But she had ordered restraint when it came to humans. At least thus far. Anduin's gaze swept the field. There were a few more Stormwind residents running toward the keep, but they drew no fire from the dark rangers. But a warning began to sound in the back of his mind. If they were done with the slaughter of their own kind and they did not want to attack the humans who had participated in the Gathering, why were they here? And the answer slammed into his head. He frantically began to scan the field for the one person, living or undead, who could possibly pose a threat to Sylvanas Windrunner: Calia Menethil. She was running as fast as she could. A warm golden field enveloped her: the Light, shielding her from harm. For now. Anduin cast a spell on himself as he raced after her, trying to close the distance between them. A shadow passed overhead. Anduin looked up, and his heart surged as a single bat flew over him, low and close, an intimidation and a taunt. He caught a glimpse of glowing red eyes, and then the bat was gone, moving forward more swiftly than he could ever run toward the Light-shielded uncrowned queen of Lordaeron. Sylvanas was running her down like a hawk would a rabbit. The shield would protect Calia, but it would not last forever, and then there
would be a few heartbeats during which she would be completely vulnerable. If he could just reach her in time, he could call down another shield for her. But his decision to send the elderly Emma back to safety on his gryphon meant that he was relying on his own two feet. He called on the Light for strength and speed and a shield of his own. He knew that he had made himself the perfect target. So be it. If Sylvanas wanted war, let her start one. But even as he closed the distance, he knew it would not be enough. The cry of denial scraped Anduin's throat raw as he uttered it. The world around him seemed to shatter like glass; all its bright shards of hope and idealism and joy were rendered jagged and sharp. The glowing aura of protection around the true queen of Lordaeron shimmered, then vanished. He watched, only a few yards too far away to save Calia, as Sylvanas Windrunner drew back a black arrow, slowly, languidly, savoring the moment, and then let it fly. Violet tendrils of smoke twined around the weapon as it flew unerringly toward its target. Time seemed to slow as Calia, her hood down and her blond hair flying, was struck in the center of the back- directly through the heart. She arched and fell forward, hitting the ground hard, arms and legs akimbo, making her last movements clumsy and graceless. Anduin called on the Light, but he was too far, too slow, and there was no response. Calia Menethil, heir to the throne of Lordaeron, was dead. Now, past all ability to help, to heal, he reached her and dropped to his knees beside her. Once more, a shadow fell over his body as well as his heart, and he looked up, devastated and furious, to see Sylvanas Windrunner smirking down at him, another arrow nocked to the bowstring. The air was filled with the sound of beating membranous wings as she was joined by a host of her rangers. They, too, had arrows nocked, all aimed at him. A spurt of fear raced through him, then absolute white-hot fury. The
shield of Light still glimmered around him, but it would not last. He had a choice. He could save himself and immediately run to the keep, protected by the Light, or he could gather Calia's limp frame and, vulnerable to even a single ordinary arrow, bear her from the field. Turalyon kept calling this a battlefield. I kept telling him he was wrong. Silently, Anduin gathered Calia's still-warm body in his arms and rose. He looked up at the dark rangers, at their dark mistress, and gazed evenly into those glowing red orbs. "You don't want a war," he said calmly. "Don't I?" She drew back on the string farther. Anduin could hear the bone bow creak. "If I kill you today, too, I'll have a matched set of dead royals: a queen and a king." He shook his head. "If you wanted war, we wouldn't be having this conversation. But I have a right to declare it. You promised not to kill any of my people." He lifted Calia's body, letting her still frame say all that needed to be said. "Ah, but she is not one of yours, is she?" Sylvanas's voice had a cold but angry edge to it, and the hair along Anduin's arms lifted. "She is- was-a citizen of Lordaeron. Its queen. You brought a usurper onto the field, Anduin Wrynn. I would be well within my rights to consider that a hostile action. Who violated the treaty first?" "She came as a healer!" "She leaves as a corpse. Did you think I would not discover what you had done?" "I swear to you by the Light, I acted in good faith. I gave no orders to your people to defect. You can believe that or not. But if you strike me down, my people and all of Stormwind's allies will retaliate. And they will do so holding nothing back." Her eyes narrowed. Anduin knew she understood the lesson of this day's tragic events. She was not universally loved among her people. He was. She ruled with an iron fist. He ruled with compassion. Neither of them was ready for a war. Anduin said a silent prayer that Sylvanas would not start one.
The silence stretched on. "I grieve for the fallen today," Anduin said. "But they did not die by my hand. Calia Menethil was indeed not my subject. As for what she thought she could accomplish...I truly do not know. Whatever it was, she paid the price for it. I am going to take her body back to the Netherlight Temple and the Conclave she so loved. If you want a war, you can start it now." He turned, feeling a phantom tingle in his exposed back as he began to walk calmly, without rushing, toward Stromgarde Keep. The shield around him faded and disappeared. Nothing happened. Then he heard the bats utter their unnerving, high-pitched sounds and a rapid, loud flapping of leathery wings. And then they were gone. There would be no war between the Alliance and the Horde today.
The next few days were a blur of regret, pain, and soul-searching for Anduin Wrynn. Genn, predictably, had been furious, but to Anduin's surprise, he had bitten his tongue when the young king walked through the gates of Stromgarde carrying the body of Calia Menethil. Faol was heartbroken, receiving the corpse of his beloved friend humbly from Anduin's arms, as stunned as Anduin had been at Calia's turn and riddled with remorse for not anticipating it. "I would never have brought her today if I'd had the slightest idea," he said. "I know," Anduin said. "Take her home. And I will do the same for my people. I'll come to the temple as soon as I can." It tore at him to see the people who once had been so full of hope look so shocked and devastated as they boarded the ships that had borne them to the Arathi Highlands and its ghosts. Even those who had not parted well from their Forsaken counterparts looked shaken. Anduin usually was able to find the right words at the right time, but now he found none.
What could he tell them, really? How could he possibly comfort them? There was no easy, obvious road back from this, and so he retired to his cabin, deep in prayer for guidance. It came in the form of a knock on the door and the appearance of an old friend. "I do not wish to disturb," Velen said. Anduin smiled wearily. "You never could," he said, and invited the draenei inside. He offered some refreshment, but Velen declined gracefully. "I will not stay long," Velen said. "But I felt I should come. You are king now, not the youth I guided only a few short years ago back on the Exodar, but I will always be there if you ever wish what wisdom the Light sees fit for me to give you." Velen doubtless thought the reminder of Anduin's time among the draenei would be comforting. But all Anduin could think of was how much he longed for those days. For that peace. And before he knew what was happening, he had blurted out, "I feel helpless, Velen. I promised my people a reunion with their loved ones. Instead, they watched them be slaughtered. I want to comfort them, but I have no words. I miss my time learning from you. I miss the Exodar. I miss O'ros." Velen smiled sadly. "We all do," he said, "but we cannot go back to happier times. We can only live in the present, and right now that present is painful. But we do have a way to be with a naaru. We are priests, Anduin, but we cannot heal others until we are steady and calm within ourselves. Go to the Netherlight Temple now. Share your grief with Faol and in so doing, help each other. Speak with Saa'ra. See what it has to say to you. There is time. Then you can greet your people on the docks and, Light willing, know what to say to help their wounded hearts." Anduin smiled. "I'll never be as wise as you, old friend." Velen chuckled and shook his head ruefully. "My only wisdom is to understand that I am not."
THE NETHERLIGHT TEMPLE When Anduin entered the temple, he saw at once that something was happening. It seemed as though everyone in the temple had clustered around the entrance to Saa'ra's chamber, which was marked by its constant radiance. Anduin, frowning, hastened toward the crowd, making his way through the priests who stood or knelt, silent, reverent. Up ahead, Anduin could see the radiant lilac form of Saa'ra, and despite his heartache and confusion, he felt the naaru's comforting brush upon his spirit. Calia Menethil's body hovered in front of Saa'ra. She lay in the air as if she were sleeping, her hands folded on her breast. Her blond hair gleamed almost as brightly as the naaru itself, falling softly, her gold and white robes draping her slender frame. Faol knelt in front of the crystalline entity, his head bowed in prayer. High Priestess Ishanah stepped beside Anduin and said quietly, "Something is happening to Calia. Her flesh has not begun to decompose. Faol has been with her since he brought her here." The draenei turned, looking down at Anduin as she said, "Saa'ra told him to wait for you, my young king." A shiver ran down Anduin's spine, and he swallowed. He took a deep breath and stepped toward the archbishop. "I'm here, Your Grace," he said quietly. "What would you have me do?" Faol turned his face up to Anduin's. "I'm not quite sure," he said. "But Saa'ra was insistent that you were to be part of this." And then Saa'ra, who had been silent, spoke in their minds. Calia would come to me when the dreams of what was past were too painful to endure, Saa'ra said. I cautioned her to have patience. There were things she had to do before the dreams would cease, things she must understand. People who would need her help. And I assured her of this seemingly strange truth: that sometimes the most beautiful and important gifts come wrapped in pain and
blood. The truth of those words hit Anduin's heart. Those were the gifts that no one ever wanted, that one would do anything not to have bestowed. But they were also indeed as Saa'ra said: beautiful and important. There will be no more of those battles for her now. Calia Menethil will be freed from the pains of the living, from the nightmares that once rent her heart. She understood that those on that field were her people. And she accepted that responsibility by giving her life to try to save them. Not human, as they were when she was young, but Forsaken, as they were in that moment. Light and dark. Forsaken priest and human priest. Together you shall bring her back as the Light and she herself would have her be. Anduin's mouth was dry, and he trembled. He looked at Faol, but the priest only nodded. They moved wordlessly to Calia's side, standing as she hovered in midair, and each of them took one of her small, pale hands. Bring her back as the Light and she herself would have her be, Saa'ra had said. He didn't know what the naaru had meant by the words, and he suspected that Faol didn't either. But somehow, he knew, Calia did. Anduin felt the Light come to him, warm and calming. It seeped through his body, soothing his spirit and his tumultuous mind. It was a familiar sensation, yet there was something different. He usually experienced the Light's power flowing through him like a river. But now it seemed like a whole ocean was utilizing him as a vessel. Anduin felt a quick flicker of fear. Would he be able to contain and direct something this powerful? He anticipated that he would feel overwhelmed, stretched to his limit, but the tide of Light that swept through him now was one that reinvigorated him even as it asked him to be fully present, to give all of himself to the task ahead. Yes, he said in his heart. I will.
The Light limned him in its warm hue, and it chased around the still yet completely intact body of the queen of Lordaeron and whirled about the Forsaken archbishop. Anduin felt it swell like a wave, then crest and break, emptying him but not depleting him. The cold hand in his squeezed. Anduin gasped as Calia opened her eyes. They glowed a soft, gentle white, not the eerie yellow hue of a Forsaken's. A smile curved a face that had no flush of life to it. Slowly her body tilted from horizontal to vertical, and her feet settled onto the stone floor. Calia Menethil was dead, but she lived. She was no mindless undead, but she was not Forsaken, either. She had been raised by a human and a Forsaken both using the power of the Light, bathed in the radiance of a naaru. "Calia," said Faol, and his voice trembled. "Welcome back, dear girl. I didn't dare hope that you would return to us!" "Someone once told me that hope is what you have when all other things have failed you," Calia said to him. Her voice was echoing, sepulchral, but like Faol's, it was warm and kind. Her white gaze went to Anduin. She smiled gently. "Where there is hope, you make room for healing, for all things that are possible-and some that are not." Anduin watched as everyone responded to Calia's-what? Resurrection? No, she was still dead. Dark gift? That wouldn't be accurate either, because it was the Light that had been present today. There was nothing of darkness in this undead woman. After a short time, though, she turned to Anduin and gave him a rueful smile. "Thank you," she said, "for helping the archbishop bring me back." "The Light didn't need my help," he said. "Well, then, for not abandoning me on the field." "I couldn't do that." He frowned and asked quietly, "Was that your plan all along? To use my work on the Gathering as a chance to reclaim your throne?" Sorrow flitted across her pale face. "No. Not really. Come sit with me."
They found a small table, and everyone gave them privacy. "Ever since I met Archbishop Faol, I had believed that one day, if I had the chance, I could show that even though I was not Forsaken, I could treat them as my people and rule them well. My brother had tried to destroy them. I wanted to help them." "So when you heard about the Gathering, you wanted to participate." She nodded. "Yes. I wanted to meet more Forsaken who were not priests. I wanted to see how they would react to meeting their families. But that was all I intended for the Gathering. I swear it." "I believe you," he said, and he saw her visibly relax. "I don't deserve that, but thank you." He folded his hands on the table and looked at her piercingly. "So what changed your mind?" "Parqual Fintallas approached me and said that they-they needed me now. That it was time. I didn't know what he meant at first, but then I realized they were defecting. I had a choice: support them, reveal who I was, and get them and others to safety, or disavow them and get them killed." She looked away. "But I got them killed anyway." "You also almost started a war," Anduin said, his voice hard. "You could have been responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands. Do you understand that?" She looked chagrined. "I do now," she said. "I was never taught how to rule, Anduin, because no one expected me to. I never formally studied politics or strategy. So when I got out there..." "You just followed your heart," Anduin said, his anger turning to sorrow. "I understand that. But a ruler doesn't always have that luxury." "No. I am not yet ready to rule. But I wish to serve the people of Lordaeron. They are my people, and now I am like them. It feels... right." She smiled. "I'll learn. And from the archbishop, I'll learn what it's like to be...this. To be undead yet walk in the Light." It should have been harrowing. It should have been ghoulish. But as Calia Menethil, changed but still herself, gazed at the king of
Stormwind, all Anduin could think of were the naaru's words: Calia was freed forever from the nightmares that had haunted her. And he was glad. It was the only comfort on one of the bleakest days he had ever known.
Velen had advised Anduin to go to the Netherlight Temple, speak with Saa'ra, and listen to what the naaru said. Then, Velen had suggested that Anduin would be able to greet his people on the docks and "Light willing, know what to say to help their wounded hearts." The draenei had been right. When the ships had come into Stormwind Harbor, Anduin was there to meet them but not to welcome them home. He was there to take them back to the Arathi Highlands. He brought with them the carvers of tombstones and the diggers of graves. The people of Lordaeron-of the Undercity-would not be left to rot, forgotten in a damp green field. Anduin had invited those who wished to return to stay on the ship; others were welcome to go back to their homes. Most stayed. Now he walked among them, watched but undisturbed by the Forsaken who manned Galen's Fall near Thoradin's Wall, as they identified, spoke words over, and buried those who had been brave enough to try to move past prejudice and fear. Anduin listened as
humans told their stories about the fallen as the Forsaken were, at last, laid to rest. Velen might deflect compliments about his wisdom, but Anduin knew better. This was healing. This was respect. When they buried Jem, Jack, and Jake-Anduin did not think he would ever forget their names-Emma broke down. Philia was there, slipping an arm around her to support the older woman, her own eyes red with weeping. "They're gone now, every one of them," Emma said. "I'm all alone." "No, you're not," Philia said. "We'll help each other."
-
Genn had returned to the Arathi Highlands with Anduin. He still hadn't had a chance to talk to the boy, and he wasn't about to let him return without accompanying him. Now he listened as Philia and Emma comforted each other, and watched as Anduin, clearly deeply moved, strode a few paces away. Genn stepped up beside him. "I knew cats were quiet, but you wolves are almost as stealthy," Anduin said. Genn shrugged. "We know how to move to suit the task," he said. "So I am discovering...repeatedly." "I've gotten to know you rather well over the last few years," Genn said, ignoring the jab. "I've watched you grow up-a harder task for you than it ought to have been. But nothing is easy in this world, it seems." "No," Anduin agreed. His blue eyes roamed the field. "Not even keeping peace for a single day." "You should know by now that peace is one of the hardest things in this or any world to keep, my boy," Genn said, not unkindly. Anduin shook his head in sorrow and disbelief. "I can't blot out the images of the Desolate Council running as fast as they could to what they thought was a future with their loved ones. I feel responsible. For them. And for them," he said, gesturing to the living still moving on
the field. "Sylvanas killed her own people, Anduin," Genn reminded him. "Not you." "Rationally, of course I know that. But it doesn't matter. Not in my bones. And not here." Anduin placed a hand on his chest for a moment, then let it fall. "Those who fell on this field did so because King Anduin Wrynn of Stormwind had promised them they would be safe as they reunited with their loved ones. And they died because of that promise. Because of me." The bitterness in his voice was like acid. Genn, who had never heard it from him before, fell silent. After a time, Anduin spoke. "You've come to lecture me, obviously. Go ahead. I deserve every word." Genn sniffed and rubbed his beard for a moment, his eyes on the horizon. "Actually, I've come to apologize." Anduin's head whipped around, and he didn't bother to hide his shock. "Apologize? What for? All you did was warn me against this." "You told me to watch. So I did. I listened, too." He pointed at an ear. "Wolves have excellent hearing. I watched the interactions. I saw tears. I heard laughter. I saw fear give way to joy." He kept his gaze on the people of Stormwind honoring their dead as he continued to speak. "I saw other things, too. I saw a Stormwind guard head out onto this field. He spoke with a Forsaken woman-his wife or his sister, perhaps. But finally he shook his head and walked away from her, back to the keep." Anduin's brow furrowed in puzzlement, but he remained quiet. "The Forsaken lowered her head and stood for a moment. Just... stood there. And then, very slowly, she walked back to Thoradin's Wall." Now Genn faced Anduin. "There was no violence. No...anger, or hate. Not even hard words, it seemed. And while those happy reunions were remarkable, extraordinary, it struck me that this was even more important. Because if humans and Forsaken could meet, with so much
emotion involved, and disagree-dislike or even be repelled by one another-and simply walk away..." Greymane shook his head. "All I'd seen from the Forsaken was treachery, deceit, and a hunger to end life." I watched my boy die in my arms, giving his life to save mine, he thought but did not say. "I saw ghastly, shambling monstrosities descend upon living beings with no desire other than to snuff out that light of life. I'd never seen what I saw that day. I never thought I could." Anduin listened. "I believe in the Light," Genn stated. "I've seen it, benefited from it, so I have to. But I've never really felt it. I couldn't feel it from Faol. I just saw what I viewed as a gut-wrenching travesty-an old friend, dead, animated like some sort of joke. Spouting things that couldn't possibly be true. "And then he said something that was true. Too true. It cut like a blade, and I couldn't bear that." Genn took a deep breath. "But he was right. You were right. I still think what was done to the Forsaken against their will was horrifying. But it's clear to me now that some of them haven't been broken by it. Some of them are still the people they once were. So I was wrong, and I apologize." Anduin nodded. A smile crossed his face fleetingly, then was gone. It was clear he was still burdened with guilt and stubbornly wouldn't relinquish the pain of it. Not yet. "You were right about Sylvanas," Anduin said, that cold bitterness lingering in his voice. "Light knows, I wish I'd listened." "I wasn't right about her, either," Genn said, startling Anduin for the second time in as many minutes. "Not entirely. I knew she couldn't let this go by without doing something. I thought she'd attack us. Not her own people." Anduin winced and turned away. "She may have killed them, but I promised the Desolate Council safe passage. Those deaths are on my conscience. They will haunt me." "No, they won't," Genn said. "Because you kept your end of the
bargain. No one realized how poorly Sylvanas Windrunner could deal with anything that wasn't complete and utter obeisance. If you ask me, the Desolate Council signed their own death warrants simply by existing as a governing body. She'd have done something to them sooner or later. Their ghosts, if Forsaken can have ghosts, won't haunt you, my boy. You did something wonderful for them." Now Anduin did turn to Greymane, looking him full in the eye. "Answer me this: Would it have been enough for you, Genn? To see your son one more time and pay for that one encounter with your life?" The question was utterly unexpected, and for a moment Genn was taken aback. Old pain shot through him, and he tightened his jaw. He didn't want to answer, but there was something in the youth's face that would not let the older man refuse. "Yes," he said at last. "Yes. It would have." And it was true. Anduin took a deep, shuddering breath and nodded at Genn. "Nonetheless, it is a tragedy, and it's done any chance of peace great harm. It's destroyed the prospect of working together with the Horde to heal the world. Azerite will continue to threaten the balance of power. It's hurt the Alliance, too. Sylvanas used a moment that could have been a true turning point as a chance to eliminate people whom she viewed as her enemies. And she did it so smoothly, so well, that I can't even call her on it. She didn't break her word. Calia was a wouldbe usurper. I can't ask Stormwind to go to war because the warchief of the Horde chose to execute individuals she will now paint as traitors. So she gets away with it. She's won. She eliminated the opposition, killed the rightful heir to Lordaeron, and did it all while looking like a noble leader for not attacking the Alliance and starting a war." Genn said nothing. He didn't need to. He simply stood next to Anduin and let the young king sort it out on his own. The minutes passed, and then, finally, Anduin spoke. "I will never, ever stop hoping for peace," he said. His voice trembled with leashed emotion. "I have seen too much good in too
many people to paint them all as evil and worthy of slaughter. And I will also never stop believing that people can change. But I realize now that I've been like a farmer expecting to harvest crops from a poisoned field. It's simply not possible." Greymane tensed. The boy was leading to something. "People can change," Anduin repeated. "But some people will never -never-desire to do so. Sylvanas Windrunner is one of those." He took a deep breath. Sorrow and grim resolve made him look older. Genn had seen similar expressions on the faces of those who had been tasked with a heartbreaking duty. When the boy spoke, Genn was glad of the words but saddened by his need to say them. "I believe," said Anduin Llane Wrynn, "that Sylvanas Windrunner is well and truly lost."

Prologue
The power the stranger radiated swirled in glorious hues and vibrations, flowing like a cape behind him, encircling his mighty head with light like a crown. The voice was audible in both the cars and the mind, and raced along the blood like a sweet song long forgotten and now suddenly recalled.
What he offered was tempting, was exciting, and made the heart ache with yearning. But still, but still. . . there was something. . ..
When he had gone, the leaders of the eredar turned to one another and spoke softly, the words intended for their minds alone.
"It is little enough to ask, for what he offers us," said the first. He stretched, in the physical world and in the metaphysical one, sending forth echoes of his strength.
"Such power," murmured the second, lost in thought. He was the elegant one, the beautiful one, and his essence was glorious and radiant. 'And he speaks the truth. What he showed us will come to pass. No one can lie in such a telling."
The third was silent. What the second had said was true. The method by which this powerful being had demonstrated the truth of what he offered could not be falsified, they all knew that. Still, this entity, this . . . Sargeras . . . there was something about him that Velen misliked.
Velen's fellow leaders were also his friends. He was particularly close to Kil'jaeden, the most powerful and decisive of the three.
Friends they had been down the years that had slipped by unnoticed by beings beyond the reach of time. That Kil'jaeden was inclined to accept the offer carried more weight with Velen than Archimonde's opinion, which, though usually sound, could occasionally be swayed by appeals to his vanity.
Velen thought again of the image shown to them by Sargeras. Worlds for them to conquer, and more importantly, to explore and investigate; for above all, the eredar were curious. For beings so powerful, knowledge was what meat and drink were to lesser beings, and Sargeras offered them a tantalizing glimpse into what could be theirs if they would only . . .
Only swear their loyalty to him.
Only pledge the same for their people.
"As usual, our Velen is the cautious one," said Archimonde. The words could have been a compliment; instead, they struck Velen as condescending. He knew what Archimonde wanted, and Velen knew the other viewed his hesitancy as nothing more than an obstacle to what he, Archimonde, craved at this moment. Velen smiled.
"Yes, I am the cautious one, and sometimes my caution has saved us as much as your decisiveness, Kil'jaeden,
and your instinctive impetuosity, Archimonde."
Both of them laughed, and for a moment Velen was warmed by their affection. Then they quieted, and he sensed that they, at least, had already made up their minds. Velen felt his heart sink as he watched them go, hoping that he would make the right decision.
The three of them had always worked well together, their diverse personalities serving to balance one another. The result was harmony and peace for their people. He knew that Kil'jaeden and Archimonde truly wanted what was best not only for themselves, but for those they led. He shared that sentiment, and always before, they had reached agreement on such things.
Velen frowned. Why did the confident, appealing Sargeras unsettle him so? The others were obviously inclined to accept the offer. Sargeras had told them that the eredar were exactly what he had been searching for. A strong, passionate, proud people, who would serve him and advance a cause that would bring all worlds, everywhere, together. He would enhance them, he
said. He would change them, make them better, give them gifts that the universe had never before seen, for indeed, the universe had never before brought together the powers that Sargeras claimed and the uniqueness that was the eredar. And what Sargeras had told them would indeed come to pass.
And yet. and yet...
Velen went to the temple, where he had often gone before when troubled. Others were there this night, sitting in a circle around the single pillar in the room that bore the precious ata'mal crystal. The artifact was ancient, so ancient that none among the eredar could remember its origins, any more than they could remember their own. Legend had it that it was a gift bestowed upon them long ago. The crystal had enabled them to expand both their mental abilities and their knowledge of the universe's mysteries. It had been used in the past for healing, for conjuration, and, as Velen hoped to use it tonight, for visions. Respectfully, he went forward and touched the triangular crystal. The warmth of it, like a small animal nestled in his hand, calmed him. He breathed deeply, letting the familiar power penetrate him, then dropped his hand and returned to the circle.
Velen closed his eyes. He opened every part of him that could receive, body and mind and magical intuition. At first, what he saw seemed only to confirm what Sargeras had promised. He saw himself standing with Archimonde and Kil'jaeden, lords not only of their own noble and proud people but of countless other worlds. Power shimmered around them, power that Velen knew would be as intoxicating as any liquor he might sip. Shining cities were theirs, along with the inhabitants of those cities, prostrating themselves before the three with cheers and cries of adoration and loyalty. Technology such as Velen had never dreamed of awaited his exploration. Tomes in strange tongues were translated for him, revealing magic hitherto unimagined and untold.
It was glorious, and his heart swelled.
He turned to look at Kil'jaeden, and his old friend smiled. Archimonde put a friendly hand on his shoulder.
Then Velen looked down at himself.
And cried out in horror.
His body was now gargantuan, but twisted and distorted. Smooth blue skin was now black and brown and gnarled, like some once-noble tree disfigured by disease. Light radiated from him, true, but not the pure light of powerful, positive energy, but a sickly green. Frantically he turned to behold his friends, his fellow leaders of the eredar. They, too, had been transformed. They, too, retained nothing of what they had been but were now-
Man'ari.
The eredar word for something horrifically wrong, something twisted and unnatural and defiled slammed into his mind with the force of a shining sword. He cried out again and his knees buckled. Velen pulled his gaze away from his tormented body, searching for the peace and prosperity and knowledge Sargeras had promised him. He beheld only atrocities. Where before him had been an adoring crowd, now he saw only mutilated corpses or bodies that, like his. like Kil'jaeden's, like Archimonde's, had been transformed into monsters. Among the dead and the distorted capered beings that Velen had never before seen. Strange dogs with tentacles sprouting from their backs. Tiny, twisted figures that danced and capered and laughed at the carnage. Deceptively beautiful creatures, their wings outstretched behind them, who surveyed what had been wrought with delight and pride. Where their cloven hooves fell, the earth died. Not just the grass, but the soil itself; all that gave life was obliterated, sucked dry.
This, then, was what Sargeras planned to do to the eredar. This was the "enhancement" he had spoken of so glowingly. If Velen's people allied with Sargeras, they would become these monstrous things . . . these man'ari. And somehow Velen understood that what he was witnessing was not a single incident. It was not just this one world that would fall. It was not even a dozen, or a hundred, or a thousand.
If he threw his support behind Sargeras, everything would be destroyed. This legion of man'ari would keep moving forward, aided by Kil'jaeden and
Archimonde and-may all that was good and pure help him-Velen. They would not stop until everything in existence was as scoured and blackened as this patch of ground that Velen viewed through blurred vision. Was Sargeras insane?
Or, worse, did he understand this and still crave it? Blood and liquid fire poured over everything, rained down upon him, burning him and spattering him until he fell to the earth and wept.
The vision mercifully vanished, and Velen blinked, trembling. He was now alone in the temple, and the crystal glowed
comfortingly. He was grateful for that balm.
It had not happened. Not yet.
What Sargeras had told them was indeed true. The eredar would be transformed, and their three leaders would be offered power, knowledge, domination . . . near-godhood.
And they would lose everything they held dear-would betray those they had vowed to protect-to do it.
Velen ran a hand across his face, relieved to find it damp only with sweat and tears and not the fire and blood of his vision. Not yet, anyway. Was it even possible to halt this, or to mitigate the destruction the legion wrought in any way?
The answer floated back to him. as reviving and sweet as a draft of dear water in a desert: Yes.
They came at once, responding to the emotion in his mental plea. It was but the matter of a few moments to brush their minds and let them see what he had seen, feel what he had felt. For a brief instant, he knew they shared his sentiments, and hope swelled within him. There was yet a chance- Archimonde frowned, "This is not a glimpse into the future that We can verify. It is only your hunch."
Velen stared at his old friend, then turned his eyes to Kil'jaeden. Kil'jaeden was not bound by his vanity as Archimonde was. He was decisive and wise....
'Archimonde is right," Kil'jaeden said smoothly. "There is no veracity here, only an image in your own mind."
Velen looked at him. pain welling inside him. Gently, sorrowfully, he detached his thoughts from theirs. Now, what was in his mind and heart stayed there. He would never again share it with these two who had once been like extensions of his own soul.
Kil'jaeden took the withdrawal as surrender, which was as Velen intended, and smiled as he placed a hand on Velen's shoulder.
"I do not want to give up what I know to be positive and good and true for what I fear might be unpleasant." he said. "Nor. I think, do you."
Velen could not risk a lie. He merely looked down and sighed. Once. Kil'jaeden and even Archimonde would have seen through such a feeble facade. But now, their thoughts were not on him. They were thinking about the apparently limitless power about to be bestowed upon them. It was too late to sway them. These two once-great beings were Sargeras's playthings; they were on their way to becoming man'ari. Velen knew with terrifying certainty that if they guessed that he was not with them, they would turn upon him with deadly consequences. He had to survive, if only to do what precious little he could to save his people from damnation and destruction.
So he nodded, but spoke nodding, and it was decided that the three leaders of the eredar would ally with the great Sargeras.
Archimonde and Kil'jaeden departed quickly to make the necessary preparations to welcome their new lord.
Velen grieved over his impotence. He wanted to save all of his people, as he had sworn to do, but he knew that was impossible.
Most would trust in Kil'jaeden and Archimonde, and follow them to their
doom. But there were a few who thought as he did, who would forsake everything merely upon his word. They would need to; their home world of Argus would shortly be destroyed, devoured by the madness of the demonic legion. Those who would survive would have to flee.
But... flee where?
Velen stared at the ata'mal crystal, despair flooding through him. Sargeras was coming. There was no place on this world to hide from such a being. How, then, would he escape?
Tears blurred his vision as he gazed at the crystal. Surely it was his tears that made it seem to shimmer and pulse. Velen blinked.
No ... it was no trick of the light seen through tears. The crystal was glowing, and before his shocked gaze, it rose slowly from its pedestal and floated until it was directly before him. Touch it, a voice in his head said softly. Trembling, awestruck, Velen reached out a strong blue hand, expecting to feel the familiar warmth of the quiescent prism.
Energy raced through him and he gasped. In intensity, it was almost as powerful as the dark energy that had surged through him in the vision. But this was as pure as that had been foul, as light as that had been dark, and Velen suddenly felt hope and strength well inside him.
The strange, glowing field about the ata'mal crystal grew, stretched upward, assumed a shape. Velen blinked, almost blinded by the radiance but not wanting to look away.
You are not alone, Velen of the eredar, the voice whispered to him. It was soothing, sweet, like the sound of flowing water and the rush of a summer wind. The radiance faded slightly, and hovering before Velen was a being unlike any he had ever seen. It seemed to be comprised of living light. Its center was a soft golden hue, the outer radius a glowing, soothing violet. Strange metallic-looking glyphs swirled around the center, calming and hypnotic, in a spiral dance of color and light. It continued to speak inside his mind, a sound that seemed to Velen to be light itself given voice.
We, too, have sensed the impending horrors about to befall this and other worlds. We strive to keep the balance, and what Sargeras is planning will rip apart everything. Utter chaos and ruination will descend, and the things that are good and true and pure and holy will be lost beyond recovery.
Who . . . what . . . Velen could not even form the question in his mind, so swept away was he by this being's glory.
We are the Naaru, the radiant entity said. You may call me .. . K'ure.
Velen's lips curved around the words, and as he whispered them aloud, "Naaru . . . K'ure . . . ," he tasted the sweetness of them, as if speaking the names granted him some of their very essence.
This is where it all begins, K'ure continued. We cannot stop it, for your friends have free will. But you have reached out with an anguished heart, to save what you can. And therefore, we will do what we can. We will save those of you whose hearts reject the horror of what Sargeras offers.
What do I do? Again tears filled Velen's eyes, tears of relief and joy this time.
Gather those who will listen to your wisdom. Go to the highest mountain in the land on the longest day of the year. Take the ata'mal crystal with you. Long, long ago, did we give it to you; it is how we will find you again. We will come and bear you away.
For a moment, a flicker of doubt, like a shadow flame, burned in Velen's heart. He had never even heard of such beings of light as the Naaru, and now this entity, this K'ure, was asking him to steal his people's most sacred object. They even claimed that it was they who had given it to the eredar in the first place! Perhaps Kil'jaeden and Archimonde had the right of it. Perhaps Velen's vision was nothing more than his fear manifesting itself.
But even as the twisting thoughts raced through his mind, he knew them to be the last vestiges of a brokenhearted yearning for everything to be as it once was, before things had changed so horribly ... before Sargeras.
He knew what he had to do. and he bowed his head before the glorious, dancing being of light.
The first and most trusted ally that Velen summoned was Talgath, an old friend and one who had aided him in the past. All rested upon this friend, who would be able to move unwatched where Velen could not. Talgath was skeptical at first, but when Velen linked their minds and showed him the dark vision he had been granted, Talgath quickly agreed. Velen said nothing of the Naaru and their offer of aid, as he himself did not know what form that aid would take. He only assured Talgath that there was a way to escape that destiny, if Talgath trusted him.
The longest day of the year was drawing close. With all the discretion he could muster, while Archimonde and Kil'jaeden were obsessing over Sargeras, Velen sent out tendrils of thought to those he trusted. Others were gathered by Talgath. coming to Velen's side in defense of themselves and their people. Velen then turned his attention to weaving the subtlest of magic webs about the two traitors he once held as dear friends, so that their attention was not caught by the frantic activity occurring just beyond their vision.
With startling speed and yet an agonizing slowness, an intricate web was created. When at last the day came, and the eredar who had chosen to follow Velen assembled atop the tallest mountain of their ancient world. Velen saw that their number was sickeningly small. They numbered only in the hundreds, these who were the only ones Velen truly trusted. He did not dare risk all by contacting those he thought would possibly turn against him.
Only a short time ago, Velen had taken the ata'mal crystal from its place. He had spent the last few days fabricating a false one, so that no alarm would be sounded when it was discovered missing. He had carved it from simple rock crystal with the utmost care, casting a glamour upon it so that it would glow. But it remained dead to the touch. If someone brushed this false crystal with his or her fingers, the theft would be revealed.
The true ata'mal crystal he now held close to his heart as he watched his people climbing the mountain, their strong legs and sure hooves finding easy
purchase. Many had already arrived and looked at him expectantly, the question clear in their eyes if not on their lips. How, they were wondering, would they escape?
How indeed, Velen thought. For a moment he despaired, but then he recalled the radiant being who had linked its thoughts with his. They would come. He knew it. In the meantime, everymoment that passed meant they were closer to being discovered. And so many were not yet here, not even Talgath.
Restalaan, another old and trusted friend, smiled at Velen. "They" will be here soon," he said reassuringly.
Velen nodded. More than likely, Restalaan was right. There had been no sign that his old friends and now enemies Kil'jaeden and Archimonde had been alerted to this outrageously bold plan. They had been far too consumed with anticipating their future power.
And yet, and yet.
The same deep instinct that had warned him to mistrust Sargeras now nagged at his mind. Something was not right. He realized he was pacing.
And there they were.
Talgath and several others had cleared a rise, smiling and waving, and Velen exhaled in relief. He started down to meet them when the crystal he held sent a powerful surge through his body. His blue fingers clenched tightly around the gem as his mind opened to its warning. Velen's knees buckled as the mental stench assaulted him.
Sargeras had already begun. He had already started creating his hideous legion, taking eredar who had been foolish or trusting enough to listen to Kil'jaeden and Archimonde and distorting them into the man'ari Velen had seen in his vision. There were thousands of man'ari of everyphysical description and ability, lying just beyond his sight and sensing. They were disguised.
somehow. If he had not been holding the ata'mal crystal, he never would have sensed them until it was far, far too late.
It might already be too late.
He turned a shocked gaze to Talgath, suddenly aware that the taint was emanating from his old friend as well as from the multitude-the Legion-of monsters who lurked beyond his sight. A prayer, wrenched from the utter depths of his despairing soul, shivered up in his mind:
K'ure! Help us!
The man'ari were scrambling up the mountain now, sensing that they had been exposed and closing in like hungry predators for the kill. Except Velen knew that death would be preferable to what these distorted eredar would do to him and those who followed him. At his wit's end, Velen gripped the ata'mal crystal and thrust it upward to the sky.
As if the heavens themselves were cracking open, a pure shaft of radiant white light appeared. Its glory shone directly onto the crystalline prism, and before Velen's stunned gaze, splintered the white light into seven distinct rays of various hues. Pain stung Velen as the crystal he held shattered. The sharp edges sliced his fingers. He gasped and instinctively released the fractured crystal, watching enraptured as the pieces hovered in the air, each transforming itself into a perfect sphere, and taking on the seven radiant hues of the light that had once been a single, perfect shaft of pure white radiance. The seven crystals-red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet-shot upward, then sped to form an enclosure of light around the frightened forms of the gathered eredar.
At that precise instant, Talgath raced toward him, naked loathing in his gaze. He slammed into the circle of multicolored lights as if into a stone wall and tumbled backward. Velen whirled and saw the man'ari descend, snarling, drooling, their claws scrabbling on a wall, made only of light, which yet protected Velen and his people.
A deep, thrumming sound raced along Velen's nerves, more felt than heard.
He looked upward and on this day of wonders saw something that surpassed even the miracle of the seven stones of light. He beheld what looked at first like a descending star, so bright he almost could not bear looking upon it. As it drew closer, he saw that it was nothing so elusive as a star in the night skies, but a solid structure, its center as soft and round as the orbs, adorned with jutting, crystalline triangles. Velen wept openly as a mental touch brushed his mind:
/ am here, as I promised I would be. Prepare to abandon this world. Prophet Velen.
Velen extended his arms upward, almost like a child begging a loving parent to be swept up into an affectionate embrace. The orb above him pulsed, and then Velen felt himself being lifted gently into the air. He floated upward, and saw that the others too were rising toward the . . . vessel? For such Velen now understood it to be, though it also vibrated with a living essence that he could not yet comprehend. In the midst of the quiet joy, Velen heard the shrieks and screams and bellows of the man'ari as their prey escaped. The base of the ship opened, and a few seconds later Velen found himself standing on something solid. He knelt on the floor, if such it could be called, and watched as the rest of his people floated toward safety. When the last one had arrived. Velen expected the door to close and this ship - this ship that was made of metal that was not metal, flesh that was not flesh, and what Velen suspected was the very essence of K'ure-to depart.
Instead, he felt a whisper in his mind: The crystals- where there was one, there are seven. Recover them, for you will need them.
Velen leaned over the opening and extended his hands. With shocking speed, the seven crystals surged upward toward him, striking his palms so hard he gasped. He gathered them close, ignoring the incredible heat they emanated, and threw himself backward. At once, the door disappeared as if it had never been present. Clutching the seven ata'mal crystals, his mind stretched so far he felt he was brushing the edge of madness. Velen hung suspended for an endless instant between hope and despair.
Had they done it? Had they escaped?
From his position at the head of the army. Kil'jaeden had an unobstructed view as the mountain was swarmed by his slaves. For a glorious moment, he tasted victory, almost as sweet as the hunger Sargeras had planted in his mind. Talgath had done his job well.
It had only been pure luck that Velen had been holding the crystal at the moment of the onslaught; had he not, his body would be lying on the ground, torn into a handful of fleshy bits.
But Velen had been holding the ata'mal crystal, and he had been warned. Something had happened-some strange lights had sprung up protectively around the traitor, and something had come for them. Now as Kil'jaeden watched, the peculiar vessel shimmered and ... disappeared.
He had escaped! Curse him, damn him, Velen had escaped!
The man'ari, whose delight had filled Kil'jaeden just seconds earlier, were now full of consternation and disappointment. He touched all of their minds; they knew nothing. What was this thing that had come to snatch Velen from Kil'jaeden's very grasp?
Fear now shuddered through Kil'jaeden. His master would not be pleased with these developments.
"What now?" asked Archimonde. Kil'jaeden turned to look at his ally
"We find them," growled Kil'jaeden. We find them and destroy them. Even if it takes a thousand years."
ONE
My name is Thrall. The word means "slave" in the human tongue, and the story behind the naming is a long one, best left for another time. By the grace of the spirits and the blood of heroes before me that runs in my veins, I have become Warchief of my people, the orcs, and the leader of a group of races known as the Horde. How this came to be, too, is another tale. The one I wish to set to parchment now, before those who lived it pass to dwell with the honorable ancestors, is the story of my father and those who believed in him; and of those who betrayed him and indeed, all our people.
What might have become of us had these events not unfolded, not even the wise shaman Drek'Thar can say. The s of Fate are many and varied, and no sane being should ever venture down the deceptively pleasant one of "if only. What happened, happened; my people must shoulder both the shame and the glories of our choices.
This is the tale not of the Horde as it exists today, a loose organization of ore, tauren, forsaken, troll, and blood elf, but of the rise of the very ftrst Horde. Its birth, like that of any infant, was marked by blood and pain, and its harsh cries for life meant death to its enemies.
For such a grim and violent tale, it begins peacefully enough, amid the rolling hills and valleys of a verdant land called Draenor... .
The heart-beat rhythm of the drums lulled the younger ores to sleep, but Durotan of the Frostwolf clan was wide awake. He lay with the others on the hard-packed dirt floor of the sleeping tent. A generous padding of straw and a thick clefthoof pelt protected him from the chill of the bone-cold earth. Even so, he felt the vibrations of the drumming travel up through the earth and into his body, as his cars were caressed by the ancient sound. How he longed to go out and join them!
Durotan would have another summer before he would be able to participate
in the Om 'riggor, the rite of adulthood. Until that much-anticipated event, he would have to accept being shunted off with the children into this large group tent, while the adults sat around the fire and talked of things that were doubtless mysterious and significant.
He sighed and shifted on the pelt, it was not fair.
The ores did not fight among themselves, but neither were they particularly sociable. Each clan kept to itself, with its own traditions, styles and manner of dress, stories, and shaman. There were even variations
of dialect that differed so much that some ores could not understand one another unless they spoke the common tongue. They almost seemed as different to one another as the other sentient race who shared the bounty of the field, forest, and streams, the blue-skinned, mysterious draenei. Only twice a year, spring and autumn, did all the orc clans come together as they were doing now, to honor that time when day and night were the same length.
The festival had officially started last night at moon-rise, though ores had been gathering at this spot for several days now. The Kosh'harg celebration had been held on this sacred spot in the land the ores called Nagrand, "Land of Winds," which lay in die benevolent shadow of the "Mountain of Spirits," Oshu'gun, for as long as anyone could remember. While ritual challenges and combat were not unusual during the festival, true anger or violence had never erupted here. When tempers flared, as they sometimes did when so many were gathered together, the shaman encouraged the parties involved to work it out peaceably, or else they were to leave the holy area.
The land in this place was lush and fertile and calming. Durotan sometimes wondered if the land was tranquil because of the willingness of the ores to bring peace to it, or if the ores were peaceful because the land was so serene. He often wondered such things, and kept them to himself, for he heard no one else voicing such odd ideas.
Durotan sighed quietly, his thoughts racing, his heart thumping in answering rhythm to the voice of the drums outside. Last night had been wonderful, stirring Durotan's soul. When the Pale Lady cleared the dark line of trees, in
Her waning phase but still bright enough to cast a powerful light that was reflected on the blankets of white snow, a cheer had gone up from the throat of every one of the thousands of orcs assembled-wise elders, warriors in their prime, even children held in their mother's strong arms. The wolves, both companions and mounts to the orcs,had joined in with exultant howls. The sound shivered along Durotan's veins as the drumming did now, a deep, primal cry of salutation to the white orb who commanded the night skies. Durotan had glanced around to behold a sea of powerful beings raising their brown hands, silvered in the light, to the Pale Lady, all with one focus. If any ogre had been foolish enough to attack, it would have fallen in a matter of heartbeats beneath the weapons of this vast sea of single-minded warriors.
Then had come feasting. Dozens of beasts had been slain earlier in the season, before the winter had set in, and dried and smoked in preparation for the event. Bonfires had been kindled, their warm light merging with the fey, white glow of the Lady, and the drumming had begun and had not stopped since.
He, like all the other children-lying on his clefthoof pelt, Durotan sniffed dismissively at the term-had
been permitted to stay up until he had eaten his fill and the shaman had departed. The shaman of every clan left, once the opening feast had been consumed, to climb Oshu'gun, which stood careful watch over their festivities, enter its caverns, and be advised by the spirits and their ancestors.
Oshu'gun was impressive even from a distance. Unlike other mountains, which were irregular and rough in their shape, Oshu'gun erupted from the ground with the precision and sharp point of a spearhead. It looked like a giant crystal set into the earth, so clean were its lines and so brightly did it glisten in the sun- and moonlight. Some legends told that it had fallen from the sky hundreds of years ago, and it was so unusual that Durotan thought those tales might be right.
Interesting though Oshu'gun might be, Durotan always thought it a bit unfair that the shaman had to stay there for the entire Kosh'harg festival. The poor
shaman, he thought, missed all the fun. But then again, he suspected, so did the children.
During the day, there were hunts and game playing and retelling of the heroics of the ancestors. Each clan had its own stories, and so in addition to the familiar tales Durotan had heard as a youngling, there were new and exciting adventures to listen to.
Entertaining as these were, and as much as Durotan enjoyed them, he burned to know what the adults discussed after the children were drowsing in the sleeping tent, after their bellies were stretched full of good food and pipes had been smoked and various brews had been shared.
He could stand it no longer. Quietly, Durotan sat up, his cars straining for any sounds to indicate that anyone else was awake. He heard nothing, and after a long minute, he got to his feet and began to move slowly toward the entrance.
It was a long, slow progression in the darkened tent. Sleeping children of all ages and sizes were sprawled everywhere in the tent, and one wrong move could awaken them. His heart racing with excitement at his daring, Durotan stepped carefully between the only faintly glimpsed shapes, placing each large foot with the delicacy of the long-legged marsh birds.
It seemed to take an eternity before Durotan finally reached the flap. He stood, trying to calm his breathing, reached out-
And touched a large, smooth-skinned body standing right beside him. He jerked his hand back with a surprised hiss.
"What are you doing?" Durotan whispered.
"What are you doing?" the other orc shot back. Abruptly Durotan grinned at how foolish they sounded.
"Same thing you arc," Durotan replied, his voice still soft. All about them, the others slept on. "We can cither keep talking about it or do it."
Durotan could tell by the size of the faint shape in front of him that the orc was a large male, probably
close to his own age. He couldn't place the scent or the voice, so it wasn't one of the Frostwolf clan. It was a daring thought-not only to do something so forbidden as to leave the sleeping tent without permission, but to do so in the company of an orc not of his own clan.
The other orc hesitated, the same thoughts no doubt running through his head. "Very well," he said at last. "Let's do it."
Durotan reached out again in the darkness, his fingers brushing the hide of the flap and curling around its edge. The two orc youths pulled back the flap and stepped out into the frosty night.
Durotan turned to look at his companion. The other orc was brawnier than he, and stood a bit taller. Durotan was the largest of his age in his clan, and unused to others being taller than he. It was a bit disquieting. His ally in mischief turned to look at him, and Durotan felt himself being assessed. The other nodded, apparently satisfied with what he saw.
They did not risk words. Durotan pointed to a large tree close to the tent, and silently the two headed for it. For a moment that was probably not as long as it felt, they were in the open, exposed to any adult who chose that instant to turn his head and see diem, but they were not spotted. Durotan felt as exposed as if he were in bright sunlight, so powerful was die moon's glow reflected off the crystalline snow. And surely the sound of the snow squeaking beneath their feet was as loud as the bellow of an enraged ogre.
At last they reached the tree and sank down behind it. Durotan's breath misted as he finally exhaled. The other orc turned to him and grinned.
"I am Orgrim, line of Telkar Doomhammer, of the Blackrock clan," the youth said in a proud whisper,
Durotan was impressed. While the Doomhammer line was not the line of a chieftain, it was well known and honored.
"I am Durotan. line of Garad. of the Frostwolf clan." Durotan replied. Now it was Orgrim's turn to react to the fact that he was sitting with the heir to another clan. He nodded approvingly.
For a moment they simply sat, reveling in the glory of their daring. Durotan began to feel the cold and wetness seep through his thick hide cape, and got to his feet. Again, he pointed at the gathering, and Orgrim nodded. They carefully peered around the tree, straining to listen. Surely now they would hear the mysteries for which they both hungered. Over the crackling sound of the huge bonfire and the deep, steady beating of the drums, voices floated to them.
"The shaman have been kept busy this winter with the fever." Durotan's father. Garad. said. He reached down and petted the huge white wolf who was drowsing by the fire. The beast, its white coat distinguishing it as a Frostwolf. made a soft crooning sound of pleasure. "Soon as one of the younglings gets cured, another falls ill."
"I am ready for spring, myself," another male said, standing and tossing another log on the fire. "It's been harsh with the animals, too. When we were preparing for the festival, we had a hard time finding clefthooves."
"Klaga makes a delicious soup from the bones, but she refuses to tell us what herbs she uses." a third said, glaring at a female who was nursing an infant. The female in question, presumably Klaga, chuckled.
"The only one who'll get that recipe is this little one when she comes of age," Klaga replied, and grinned.
Durotan's jaw dropped. He turned his head to stare at Orgrim, who wore a similar expression of stunned dismay. This was what was so important, so secret that the children were forbidden to leave the tent to listen to it? Discussions of fevers and soups?
In the bright light of the moon. Durotan had no trouble seeing Orgrim's face clearly. The other youth's brows drew together in a frown.
"You and I can come up with something more interesting than this. Durotan." he said in a low, gruff voice.
Durotan grinned and nodded. He was certain of it.
The festival lasted for two more days. During the daytime and at night, when the two would sneak out together, they challenged each other to different contests of skill. Racing, climbing, strength, sure-footedness- everything they could think of. And each defeated the other almost as if they had planned on taking turns. When, on the last day. Orgrim loudly called for a fifth challenge to break the stalemate, something inside Durotan made him speak.
"Let us not perform common, ordinary challenges," Durotan said, wondering where the words came from even as he uttered diem,
"Let us do something truly different in the history of our people."
Orgrim's bright gray eyes gleamed as he leaned forward. "What do you suggest?"
"Let us be friends, you and I."
Orgrim's heavily muscled jaw dropped. "But-we are not of the same clan!" he said, in a voice that indicated that Durotan might have proposed a friendship between the great black wolf and the mild talbuk.
Durotan waved a dismissive hand. "We are not enemies," he said. "Look around you. The clans come together twice a year and there is no harm in it."
"But . . . my father says it is precisely because we come together so seldom that the peace is kept," Orgrim continued. His brow knotted with concern.
Disappointment colored Durotan's words with bitterness. "Very well. I thought you braver than the others, Orgrim of the Doomhammer line, but you are no better than they-timid and shy and unwilling to see beyond what has always been done to what is possible."
The words had come from his heart, but had Durotan calculated them and honed them for weeks, he could not have chosen better.
Orgrim's brown face flushed and his eyes snapped.
"I am no coward!" he snarled. "I back down from no challenge, you upstart Frostwolf!"
He sprang on Durotan then, knocking the smaller orc off his feet, and the two pummeled each other until the shaman needed to be brought in for healing and lecturing on the inappropriateness of fighting in a sacred space.
"Impetuous boy," scolded the head shaman of the Frostwolves, an ancient orc female they called "Mother" Kashur. "You are not too old to be beaten as a disobedient child, young Durotan!"
The shaman who tended Orgrim muttered similar displeased sounds. But even as blood streamed freely from his nose, and as he watched the shaman heal a wicked gash on Orgrim's brown torso, Durotan grinned. Orgrim caught his gaze and grinned back.
The challenge had begun, the final challenge, so much more important than races or lifting stones, and neither
was willing to admit defeat ... to say that a friendship between two youths of different clans was wrong. Durotan had a feeling that this particular challenge would end only when one of them was dead ... and perhaps not even then.
TWO
I remember when we first encountered the tauren. I remember Cairne Bloodhoof's deep voice and calm face. I remember sitting oit the ground in a tent that could be broken down and erected with startling speed, and feeling oddly at home. We smoked pipes, shared food and drink, felt the drumming in our bones, and talked. The tauren seemed to me bestial at first, but there was wisdom and humor in them, and by the time the first round of negotiations had been conducted, I knew that the ores had a rare ally in these half-bovine
beings.
Night had fallen while we spoke, a soft night befitting this beautiful land. We left the tent and gazed up at stars too numerous too count, a sweet wind caressing our faces. I turned to Drek'Thar, to ask for his wisdom. To my astonishment I saw tears on his face, glinting in the moon's light.
"This is how we used to be, my chieftain," he said in a broken voice. He lifted his arms and tilted his head back, calling the wind to embrace him and dry the tears on his strong green face. "Close to the earth. Close to the spirits. Strong in the hunt, gentle with the younglings, knowing our place in the world to be right and just. Understanding the balance of taking and giving. The only magic the tauren practice is the good, clean magic of the earth, and the land reflects that, the way Draenor once reflected our connection."
I thought of the tauren's request for aid infighting their enemy, the vile, filthy centaur.
"Yes . . . I feel for them. It will be good to be able to help them," I said.
Drek 'Thar laughed, turning his blind eyes to me and seeing me more clearly than anyone with sight could.
"Oh, my young Thrall," he said, chuckling still, "you do not yet understand. They will help us."
Durotan ran as fast as his powerful young legs could carry him. His breath came fast, and sweat dappled his reddish-brown skin, but he forced himself to keep going. It was summer, and his large, flat feet were bare. The grass was soft beneath him as he ran, and occasionally he would step on the bright purple blossom of a dassanflower. The scent from the bruised plant traditionally cultivated for healing wafted up like a blessing, inspiring him to run even farther, even faster.
Now he was on the fringe of the Terokkar forest, pushing forward into its cool, gray-green depths. He had to watch out for the twining roots of the elegant trees lest he trip over them, and his pace perforce slowed. Soft lights
glowed in the green heart of this forest, and the calm it exuded was at sharp odds with Durotan's need for triumph. He increased his pace, leaping over fallen tree trunks covered with moss, ducking under low-slung branches with the grace of a talbuk. His black hair, long and thick and spilling all the way to the middle of his back, flew behind him. His lungs burned and his legs cried out for him to cease, but he ground his teeth and ignored the pleas from his body. He was a Frostwolf, the heir to clan chieftaincy, and no Blackrock would possibly-
Durotan heard a fair approximation of a war cry behind him and his heart sank. Orgrim's voice, like Durotan's, was still sinking toward the deep bellow that marked an adult male, but even Durotan had to admit it was already impressive. He willed his legs to pump even harder, but they felt as heavy and unmoving as if they had been carved of stone. He watched in dismay out of the corner of his eye as Orgrim came into his field of vision and then, with a final spurt of energy, raced past him.
The Blackrock orc extended his arm and lunged, managing to hit the tree trunk in the clearing that they had decided represented the goal of the race right before Durotan did. Orgrim kept going for several more strides, as if his powerful legs, once put into motion, were reluctant to stop. Durotan's legs had no such problems, and the heir to the Frostwolf clan fell forward, barely catching himself. He lay facedown in the cool, sweet-smelling mossy earth, gasping for air,
knowing he should sit up, knowing he should challenge Orgrim again, but too exhausted to do anything other than lie on the forest floor and recover.
Beside him, he heard Orgrim doing likewise, and then the other orc youth rolled over on his back and began to laugh. Durotan joined in. The birds and small animals that inhabited the Terokkar forest were silent as two ores uttered sounds of mirth that, Durotan thought as his lips curled past his stillforming tusks, probably sounded more than a little like the fierce war cries that presaged a hunt.
"Ha," grunted Orgrim, sitting up and punching Durotan in a playful manner.
"It is little effort to beat a stripling like you.
Durotan."
"You have so much muscle your brain is starved," Durotan retorted. "Skill is as important as power. But the Blackrock clan wouldn't know about such things."
There was no malice in their banter. Their clans had been troubled at first by the friendship between the two youths, but Durotan's stubborn argument- that just because something had never been done before did not mean it could not be done-amused and
impressed the leaders of both clans. It helped that both the Frostwolves and the Blackrocks were both traditionally even-tempered orc clans. Had Durotan proposed such a friendship with a Warsong clan member or a Bonechewer, for example, known for their intense clan pride and distrust of others, the little flame of friendship would have died quickly. So the elders watched. and waited for the novelty to fade and for each youth to return to his rightful place and keep the familiar order that had been established for...
as long as anyone could recall.
They were disappointed.
The frost of late winter had given way to spring and now the full blowsy warmth of summer, and the friendship continued.
Durotan knew that they were watched, but as long as no one interfered, he did not object.
Durotan closed his eyes and let his fingers spread over the moss. The shaman said that all things had a life, a power, a spirit. They were deeply involved with the spirits of the elements-earth, air, fire, and water-and the Spirit of the Wilds-and claimed they could sense the life force in earth and even seemingly dead stone. All Durotan could feel was the cool, slightly moist sensation of moss and soil beneath his palms.
The earth shuddered. His eyes snapped open.
He bolted upright, his hand automatically going for the spiked club that he constantly carried. Orgrim preferred a heavy metal and wood hammer, the traditional weapon of the Blackrocks and a simplified version of the legendary hammer that would one day come to him. The two boys exchanged glances. They did not need to speak to communicate. Was the thing that made the earth shake so an enormous clefthoof, with its shaggy pelt that made magnificent blankets and rich
red flesh that could feed almost the whole clan, or was it something more dangerous?
What did live in the Terokkar forest, anyway? They had been here only once before....
They got to their feet in unison, their small dark eyes peering into the now ominous-seeming dark corners of the close-growing trees, searching for whatever had made the noise.
Boom. The earth shuddered again. Durotan's heart started to beat faster. If it was a small clefthoof, maybe they could take it down together and share the spoils with both clans. He glanced over at Orgrim and saw the other's eyes gleam with excitement.
Boom.
Boom.
Crash.
Both youths gasped and then retreated as the noise came closer. A tree only a few yards away from them seemed to splinter before their eyes. The thing that had made the noise and so casually dispatched an ancient tree suddenly came into view.
It was enormous, it carried a club as big as they were, and it was most
definitely not a clefthoof.
And it had seen them.
It opened its mouth and bellowed something that was vaguely intelligible, but Durotan wasn't about to waste time figuring out what it had said.
Their thoughts as one, the two boys turned and fled.
Now Durotan wished desperately that they had not decided to challenge one another to a race earlier, for his legs had not hilly recovered. Yet still they moved when he asked it of them, the need for survival lending him energy.
How had they wandered so far into ogre territory? And where were the gronn? Durotan imagined one of the ogre's masters forcing its way through the trees as the ogre had-towering over ordinary ogres as ogres towered over the orcs,even more hideous than an ogre, more of the earth than of flesh and yet so terribly wrong, its one eye bloodshot and staring as it pointed at Durotan and Orgrim and directed the ogre toward it.
He and Orgrim were not yet of the season where they would be initiated into adulthood and permitted to go with the warriors of the clans to hunt the ogres and, on rare occasions, the gronn themselves. They had gone on hunts that their clans had perceived as less dangerous, for talbuk and other easy prey, but Durotan had always yearned for the day when he would be allowed to tackle these fearsome creatures, winning honor for himself and his clan.
Now, he wasn't so sure. The earth continued to tremble, and the shouts of the ogre were coming more clearly now.
"Crush little ores! Me smash!" The roar that followed this almost made his ears bleed.
The thing was gaining on them. Despite his brain's panicked orders to his body to run faster, faster curse
you, he could not put any distance between him and the monstrous being that
loomed so close that its vast shadow almost blotted out what little light filtered through the tree branches.
The trees thinned and the light grew brighter. They were close to the edge of the forest now. Durotan kept running and burst into the open space of the meadow, his feet falling again on soft grass, Orgrim was ahead of him, but not by much. Despair washed through Durotan, followed hard by a black wave of fury.
They were not yet adults! They had not gone on their first real hunt, they had not danced by the fire with the females, they had not bathed their faces in the steaming blood of their first solo kills. There was so much they had not done. To die a glorious death in battle was one thing, but Theywere so overpowered by the hideous creature as to make their deaths humorous rather than honorable.
Knowing it could cost him precious seconds, but unable to resist the impulse, Durotan turned his head to scream a curse at the ogre before it smashed him as flat as a graincake with its club.
What he saw made his jaw drop.
Their rescuers did not utter a sound. They moved in silence, a quiet tide of blue and white and silver that seemingly sprang out of the very air. Durotan heard the familiar whine of arrows shrieking through the air and a heartbeat later the ogre's cries were tinged not with rage but with pain. Dozens of arrows, tiny things on that massive pale body, sprouted from it, and it halted its deadly progress. It yelled and tried to brush the irritations from its skin.
A clear voice rang out. Even though he did not understand the language, Durotan recognized words of power when he heard them, and his skin prickled. Suddenly the sky was filled with lightning. But this was unlike any lightning Durotan had seen invoked by a shaman. Blue and white and silver energy crackled around the ogre, swirling about it and closing in on it like a net. The monster bellowed again and fell. The earth shook.
Now the draenei, their bodies covered in some sort of metallic plating that
reflected the cool hues of the magical energies in a display that dazzled Durotan's eyes, dismounted and descended upon the fallen ogre. Blades flashed, more words of power and command were uttered, and Durotan was forced to shut his eyes or be driven mad by the display.
At last silence fell. Durotan opened his eyes again to see that the ogre was dead. Its eyes still stared, its tongue protruded from its parted lips, and its body was covered with red blood and black burn marks.
So great was the silence that Durotan could hear his own ragged breathing and that of Orgrim. The two looked at each other, stunned by what they had just witnessed.
Both had seen the draenei before, of course, but only at a distance. They came now and then to each
clan, ready to trade their carefully crafted tools and weapons and decorative pieces of carved stone in exchange for the thick pelts of the forest animals, brightly woven blankets, and raw materials the ores culled from land and stone. It had always been an occasion of interest in the clans, but the exchanges only lasted a few hours. The draenei-blue-skinned, soft-spoken, eerily arresting-did not invite closeness, and no clan leader had ever asked them to stay and share their hospitality. Relationships were cordial but aloof, and everyone involved seemed to want it that way.
Now the leader of the group that had arrived so unexpectedly strode over to Durotan. From his position on the earth, Durotan saw what he had never noticed when he had regarded the draenei from a distance.
Their legs did not go straight from their torsos to the earth. They curved backward, like . . . like a talbuk's, and ended in cloven hooves that were encased in metal from the shiny blue hoof upward. And ... yes, it was most definitely a thick, hairless tail that swished back and forth. Now their owner was bending over him, offering a strong blue hand. Durotan blinked, staring a moment longer at the unexpected shape of the draenei's feet and the reptilian tail, then got to his feet unaided. He looked into a face that bore strange plating on its head, like armor that had grown there. Black hair and a beard
flowed over a colorful tabard, and the piercing, glowing eyes were the color of a winter lake. "You are injured?" the draenei asked in halting common Orcish, his tongue obviously having trouble wrapping itself around the guttural syllables.
"Only my pride," Durotan heard Orgrim mutter in his clan dialect. He, too, was somewhat stung. The draenei had obviously saved both their lives, and he was grateful of course. But they had seen two proud orc youths running from danger. Granted, that danger had been very real-one blow from that gigantic club would have squashed him and Orgrim into two small, crumpled piles-but still.
The draenei may or may not have heard or understood Orgrim; Durotan thought he saw the lips curve in a smile. The draenei glanced skyward, and to his dismay, Durotan realized that the sun was low on the horizon.
"You two have wandered far from home, and the sun settles to sleep," he said. "Which clan do you hail from?"
"I am Durotan. of the Frostwolf clan, and this is Orgrim of the Blackrock clan."
The draenei looked startled. "Two different clans? Were you challenging one another, that you wandered so far from your respective homes?"
Durotan and Orgrim exchanged glances. "Yes . . . and no," Durotan said. "We are friends."
The draenei's eyes widened. "Friends . . . from two different clans?"
Orgrim nodded. "Yes." He added, somewhat defensively, "It is not traditional, but it is not forbidden."
The draenei nodded, but he still looked surprised. He regarded both of them for a moment, then turned to two of his companions and murmured something in his native tongue. Durotan thought the language profoundly musical, like the sound of a stream meandering over stones, or a bird's call.
The other two draenei listened intently, then nodded. One took a waterskin from his belt, drank deeply, and then began to run with a gait nearly as smooth and swift as a talbuk's, heading southwest where the Frostwolf lands were. The second raced toward the cast, to the Blackrock clan.
The draenei who had been speaking with them turned. "They will notify your families that you are well and safe. You will return home tomorrow. In the meantime, I am happy to offer you the hospitality of the draenei. My name is Restalaan. I am the leader of the guards of Telmor, the town with which both your clans regularly trade. I regret to say I do not remember cither of you, but then, the orc younglings seem a bit leery of us when We come to your territory."
Orgrim bristled. "I am afraid of no one and nothing."
Restalaan smiled a bit. "You ran from the ogre."
Orgrim's brown face darkened and his eyes glinted angrily. Durotan lowered his head slightly. As he had feared, Restalaan and the others had borne witness to their shame, and now they would be mocked.
"That," Restalaan continued calmly, as if he had not noticed the effect his words had had on the two. "is wisdom. If you had not fled, we would be sending two corpses home to your families tomorrow instead of two healthy, strong orc youths. There is no shame in fear, Orgrim and Durotan. Only in letting fear prevent you from doing the right thing. And in your case, running was definitely the right thing."
Durotan stuck out his chin. "One day, we will be strong and our full size. Then, it will be the ogres who fear us."
Restalaan turned a mild face to him, and to Durotan's surprise, he nodded. "I completely agree," he said. "Ores are powerful hunters."
Orgrim narrowed his eyes, looking for the taunt, but there was none.
"Come," Restalaan said. "There are dangers in the Terokkar forest at night
that not even the guards of Telmor would willingly face. Let us go."
Though exhausted, Durotan found the strength to keep up a steady running pace; he would not twice be shamed in one day. They ran for some time, and the sun eventually dipped below the horizon in a glorious display of crimson, gold, and finally purple. He glanced up now and then, trying not to appear rude, but curious indeed at seeing these strangers at more than several yards'
distance. He kept waiting for the signs of a city-roads made by countless feet traveling the same path, fire cairns lighting a path, the shadows of buildings against the darkening sky. He
saw nothing. And as they continued, he felt a quick stab of fear.
What if the draenei were not planning to help him and Orgrim after all? What if they were going to capture them, to hold them for ransom? What if they were going to do something worse-sacrifice them to some dark god, or-
"Here we are," Restalaan said. He dismounted and knelt on the ground, moving aside some leaves and pine needles. Orgrim and Durotan exchanged confused glances. They were still in the middle of a forest. No city, no roads, nothing at all. Both ores gathered themselves. They were severely outnumbered, but they would not die without a fight.
Still kneeling on the pine-needle carpet, Restalaan uncovered a beautiful green crystal. It had been carefully hidden beneath the everyday detritus of the forest. Durotan stared, enraptured at the beauty of the thing. It would fit into die palm of his hand, and he ached to touch it, to feel that smoothness, that strange pulsing, against his skin. Somehow he knew it would exude a calm the likes of which he had never experienced. Restalaan uttered a string of syllables that branded themselves on Durotan's brain.
"Kehla men samir, solay 'amaa kahl."
The forest began to shimmer as if it were a reflection caught by a once-still lake into which a stone had been tossed. Despite himself, Durotan gasped. The shimmering increased, and then suddenly there was no forest, no trees,
only a large, paved road that led up the side of the mountains to a place that contained images Durotan had never even conceived.
"We are in the heart of ogre country, though it was not so when die city was built so long ago," Restalaan said, rising. "If the ogres cannot see us, they cannot attack us."
Durotan found his tongue. "But. .. how?"
"A simple illusion, nothing more. A trick of . . . the light."
There was something in the way he said this that made Durotan's skin prickle. Seeing the ore's confused expression, Restalaan continued. "The eye cannot always be trusted. We think what we see is always real, that the light always reveals what is there the same way at all times. But light and shadow can be manipulated, directed, by those that understand it. In the speaking of these words and the touching of the crystal, I have altered how the light falls on the rocks, the trees, the landscape. And so your eye perceives something entirely different from what you thought was there."
Durotan knew he still stared stupidly. Restalaan chuckled slightly. "Come, my new friends. Come where none of your people have ever been before. Walk down the roads of my home."
THREE
Drek'Thar had not seen the cities of the draenei when they were at peace. He only saw them when . .. well, I am getting ahead of myself. But he told me that my father had walked the shining roads of the draenei, had eaten their food, slept in their buildings, spoken with them fairly. Had caught a glimpse of a world so unlike our own that even today, it is hard to wrap one's mind around it. Even the lands of the kaldorei are not so alien to me as what I have learned of the draenei. Drek 'Thar said that Durotan did not have the words to describe what he saw; perhaps today, living in this land that bears his name and seeing what I have seen, he would. Regret is a bitter taste. ...
Durotan couldn't move. It was as if the mysterious net of shining energy had
flung itself about him as it had the ogre, and he was as helpless to resist. He stared, his mouth slightly open, trying to make sense of what his eyes showed him. The draenei city was glorious! Woven into the side of the mountain as if it had sprung from it, to Durotan's eyes it was a union of stone and metal, of nature and artifice. He did not know exactly what he was seeing, but he knew it to be harmonious. With its concealing spell dissolved, the city was revealed in its tranquil magnificence. Everything he saw drew the eye upward. Massive stone steps, wide and blunt at the base and tapering toward the top, led to spherical dwellings. One reminded Durotan of a snail shell; another, of a mushroom. The combination was striking. Bathed in the hues of the setting sun, the bold lines of the steps were softened, and the domes seemed even more invitingly rounded.
He turned to see a similar expression of awe on Orgrim's face, and then saw the slight smile curving Restalaan's blue lips.
"You are welcome here, Durotan and Orgrim," Restalaan said. The words seemed to break the spell, and Durotan moved forward awkwardly. The stone of the roads had been smoothed, by time or draenei hands, he could not say. As they drew closer, Durotan could see that the city continued up the mountain. The architectural pattern of wide, bold steps leading to a softly curved structure was repeated here. There were long roads, made of the same white stone that somehow did not seem to get dirty although at least ten generations of ores had lived and died since the draenei had arrived. Instead of the skins and horns of animals slain in the hunt, the draenei seemingly utilized the gifts of the
earth. Gleaming gems were everywhere, and there was that curious overabundance of light brown metal unlike any Durotan had ever seen. The ores knew metal; they worked it to serve them. Durotan himself had helped in the hunt with axe and sword. But this .. .
"What is your city made of?" Orgrim asked. It was the first thing he had said since the two began their odd journey in the company of the draenei.
"Many things," Restalaan said amiably. They were passing through the gates
now, and receiving curious, but not hostile, looks from the denizens of this place. "We are travelers, fairly new to your world."
"New?" Durotan said. "It was over two hundred summers ago that your people came here. We were not as We are now."
"No, you are not," Restalaan agreed smoothly. "We have watched the ores grow in strength and skill and talent. You have impressed us."
Durotan knew it was meant as a compliment, but somehow the comment stung. As if ... as if the draenei thought they were somehow better than the ores. The thought came and went, fleeting as a brush from a butterfly's wings. He kept looking around, and to his shame, wondered if that was not indeed the case. No orc dwelling was this ornate, this complicated. But then . . . the ores were not draenei. They did not need, or choose, to live like the draenei.
"To answer your question, Orgrim, when We arrived here, We utilized everything We had brought with us. I know your people build boats, to travel the rivers and lakes. Well, we came on a boat that could travel in the sky ... a boat that brought us here. It was made of metal and . . . other things. Once we realized that this was to be our new home, we took part of the boat and used it in our architecture,"
So that was the giant, muted, swirling metal that seemed at once to be made of copper and skin. Durotan's breath caught.
Beside him, Orgrim scowled.
"You lie! Metal cannot float!"
An orc would have growled and boxed Orgrim's cars-hard-for such insolence. The draenei merely chuckled.
"So one would think. But one would think that it would not be possible to summon the elements to fight an ogre if one did not know better."
"That is different," sniffed Orgrim. "That is magic."
"So is this, of a sort," Restalaan said. He beckoned to one of his men and said something in his native tongue. The other draenei nodded and hurried ahead.
"There is someone I would like you to meet, if he is not too busy," Restalaan said, then fell silent. Durotan had a thousand questions but did not dare voice them, fearing that he would make himself look foolish. Orgrim seemed to have accepted Restalaan's comment about magic, but both youths still craned their necks looking around.
They passed many draenei in the street, and once
saw a female who looked about their age. She was delicately built, but tall, and when Durotan met her gaze, she seemed startled.
Then a soft smile curved her lips and she ducked her head shyly.
Durotan felt himself smiling in return. Without thinking, he said, "In our encampment you would find many children. Where are the draenei children?"
"We do not have many," Restalaan said. "Our people are very long-lived, and because of that we do not often have children."
"How long-lived?" asked Orgrim.
"Very," was all Restalaan would say. "Suffice it to say that I remember our arrival here."
Orgrim stared openly at their companion. Durotan wanted to elbow him, but he was too far away. He suddenly realized that the young-seeming female they had just seen was probably nowhere near his age after all. At that moment, the scout that Restalaan had dispatched returned and spoke quickly. Restalaan looked pleased at whatever the scout had to say, then turned, smiling, to the two ores.
"The one who brought us to this world, our prophet, Velen, is staying here for several days. I thought he might wish to see you. It is not often We get such visitors." Restalaan's smile widened. "I am very pleased to say that not only
has Velen agreed to meet you, he has invited you to stay with him this evening. You are to dine with him and sleep in the magister's house. This is a very high honor indeed." Both boys were struck dumb. Dinner with the Prophet, the leader of all the draenei?
Durotan was beginning to think it might have been better if he had been squashed flat by the ogre's club.
They followed dutifully as Restalaan led them down the winding, climbing streets up through the foothills and to the large building that sat highest on the mountain. The steps, perfectly square and solid, seemed to go on forever, and Durotan's breath came quickly as they climbed. He reached the top and was regarding the snail-shell structure with interest when Restalaan said,
"Look back."
Durotan and Orgrim obeyed, and Durotan's breath caught in his throat. Below them, spread out like jewels on a meadow, was the draenei city. The last bit of sunset painted them in flaming colors, then the sun settled over the horizon and all was bathed in shades of purple and gray. Lights came on in the houses, and Durotan thought of the stars in the sky settling on the earth.
"I do not mean to brag, but I am proud of my people and our city," Restalaan said. "We have worked hard here. We love Draenor.
And I never thought to have the chance to share it with an ore. The ways of destiny are strange indeed."
As he said this, a deep, almost ancient sorrow seemed to settle on his strong blue features. He shook off the mood and smiled.
"Come in, and you will be attended to,"
Silent, shocked almost beyond the ability to speak, their young minds wide open to all the sights and sounds and smells of this thoroughly alien place, Durotan and Orgrim entered the magister's scat. They were shown into rooms that while ornate and beautiful made them feel oddly penned in. The curving
walls, so attractive from the outside and no less lovely here, seemed to confine rather than embrace them. Fruits sat in bowls ready for consumption, strange clothes were set out for them to wear, and a tub of water so hot that it steamed sat in the middle of the room.
"That water is too hot to drink and is too much for steeping leaves," Durotan said.
"It is for bathing," the draenei replied.
"Bathing?"
"To wash the dirt from one's body," Restalaan said. Orgrim shot him a look, but Restalaan seemed to be quite serious.
"We do not bathe," Orgrim growled.
"We swim in the rivers in summer," Durotan said. "Perhaps this is similar."
"You do not need to do anything you feel uncomfortable with," said Restalaan. "The bath, the food, the clothes are here for your pleasure. Prophet Velen will expect to see you in an hour. I will come for you then. Is there anything you need?"
They shook their heads. Restalaan nodded and closed the door. Durotan turned to Orgrim.
"Do you think we are in danger?" Orgrim eyed the strange materials and the hot water. "No," he said. "But... I feel like I am in a cave. I would rather be in a tent."
"Me, too." Durotan went to the wall and tentatively touched the curving surface. It felt cool and smooth beneath his fingers; he realized that he had expected it to feel warm and ... somehow alive.
Durotan turned and pointed at the water. "Do you want to try it?"
"No," Orgrim said. Both ores started laughing, and both eventually splashed
their faces and found the warm water to be more pleasant than anticipated. They ate the fruit, drank the water, and decided that the cloth vests laid out for their use were acceptable to wear in place of their soiled, sweat-stiff tunics, but that they would keep their leather breeches.
The time passed more swiftly than they anticipated, and dicy were engaged in a challenge to bend one of the metal legs of a chair when there came a soft knock on the door. They jumped guiltily; Orgrim had managed to twist the chair leg somewhat and it stood a bit crookcdlv now.
"The Prophet is ready to see you now." said Restalaan.
He is an Elder, was the first thing Durotan thought as his eyes met those of Prophet Velen.
Seeing the other draenei up close had been startling enough. To behold Velen was something else again.
The Draenei Prophet was half a head taller than the tallest of the city guards Durotan had seen, but not as powerful-seeming physically. His body, clad in soft, swirling, light tan robes, seemed less muscular than theirs. And his skin! It was a warm alabaster hue. His eyes, deep set and wise, glowed a brilliant blue, and were encircled by deeply etched wrinkles, speaking of one who was not just an Elder, but possibly even ancient. His silver hair did not flow down his back, as was the case with the others, but was ornately braided and looped, exposing his pale skull. His beard flowed like a silver wave almost to his waist.
Not Elder. Not even ancient, Durotan thought as those intense blue, glowing eyes settled upon him and seemed to bore into his very soul. Almost . . . outside of time altogether.
He thought about Restalaan's comment, diat he himself was over two hundred summers.
Velen was a good deal older than that.
"Welcome," Velen said in a mellow voice as he rose and inclined his head. The braids danced with the movement. "I am Velen. I am glad that my people found you today, though I doubt not that in a few years you would be more than capable of handling an ogre and even a gronn or two by yourselves."
Again, Durotan did not know how he knew this, but this was no idle compliment. Orgrim sensed it too, for he stood up even straightcr and met the draenei's eyes evenly. Velen waved them to sit and they did so. Durotan felt awkward and ungainly, sitting at the lavish tabic in the ornately carved chairs. When the food came out, he relaxed inwardly. Haunch of talbuk, roasted whitefcathers, large rounds of bread, and plates heaped high with vegetables-this was food he knew and understood. Somehow, he had expected something entirely different. But why? Their buildings and way of life might be vastly different from that of the orcs,but like the orcs,the draenei lived off what the land could provide. The preparation was slighdy unusual- the ores tended to cither boil dicir food or cook over an open flame, when they cooked at all; frequendy flesh was eaten raw-but overall, food was food, and this food was delicious.
Velen was an excellent host. He asked questions and seemed genuinely interested in the responses: How old would the boys be before they could hunt ogres? Choose a mate? What was their favorite thing to cat? Their favorite weapon? Orgrim. even more than Durotan, warmed to the conversation and began talking of his prowess. To his credit, he did not need to embellish his stories.
"When my father passes, I will inherit the Doomhammcr." Orgrim said proudly. "It is an old and honorable weapon, passed down from father to eldest child."
"You will swing it well. Orgrim," said Velen. "But I trust that it will be many years before you take on the name of Doomhammer."
The fact that his father would have to die before he
would become Orgrim Doomhammer seemed to have momentarily escaped the young ore. and he abruptly grew solemn. Velen
smiled, with. Durotan thought, a hint of sorrow. At the movement, fine cracks appeared in Velen's face, the subtlest of spidcrwebs on that smooth white surface.
"But describe this hammer to me. It must be a mighty weapon."
Orgrim brightened again. "It is enormous! The stone is black and blunt and powerful, and the shaft is made of carefully crafted wood. Over the years, the shaft has had to be replaced, but the stone itself has not a chip on it. It is called the Doomhammer because when its owner takes it into battle, it spells doom for the enemy."
"I sec," said Velen, still smiling.
Orgrim was warming to his task. "But there is also another prophecy," he continued. "It is said that the last of the Doomhammer line will use it to bring first salvation and then doom to the orc people. Then it will pass into the hands of one who is not of the Blackrock clan, all will change again, and it will once again be used in the cause of justice."
"That is a powerful prophecy," said Velen. He said no more, but Durotan felt a shiver. This man was dubbed "Prophet" by his people. Did he know if the Doomhammer prophecy would come true? Did Durotan dare to ask?
Orgrim continued, describing the Doomhammer in loving detail. Durotan, who had seen the weapon in question, ceased listening to Orgrim's chatter and focused on Velen, Why was this being so interested in them?
Durotan was a sensitive youth, he knew. He had overheard some snippets of conversation from his parents, who were worried about such sensitivity, and from Mother Kashur. who scoffed at them and told them to worry about important things and to "leave the boy to his fate." Durotan knew fcigncd interest when he saw it. and felt that he'd recognize it even in a draenei. But Velen's brilliant blue eyes were bright and focused, his kind if ugly face open, his questions sincere. He wanted to hear about the ores.
And the more he heard, the sadder he seemed to become.
/ wish Mother Kashur could be here instead of me, Durotan thought suddenly. She would appreciate this opportunity more than Orgrim or I could.
When Orgrim had finished describing the Doomhammer. Durotan asked, "Can you tell us of your people. Prophet? We know so litdc. In the last few hours I have learned more than any of my people have over the last hundred years, I think."
Velen turned glowing blue eyes to Durotan. Durotan wanted to quail from that gaze, not because he was afraid of it. but because he had never before felt so...seen.
"The draenei have never withheld information, young Durotan. But... I believe you may be the first who has ever asked. What do you wish to know?"
Everything, Durotan wanted to stay, but instead focused his question. "The ores had never met the draenei until two hundred summers past. Restalaan said you came here in a great vessel that can travel the skies. Tell me more of this."
Velen took a sip of the beverage that tasted like summer to Durotan and smiled. "To begin with, 'draenei' is not our true name. It is a term that means ... 'exiled ones.
Durotan gaped.
"We disagreed with others in our world. We chose not to sell our people into slavery, and for that we were exiled. We have spent much time finding a suitable place to dwell-a place to call our own. We fell in love with this land, and We call it Dracnor."
Durotan nodded. He had heard the term before. He liked how it sat on his tongue when he spoke it, and the ores did not have a name for this place other
than "world."
"It is our term, We have not the arrogance to think the ores would use it as well. But such We have dubbed it, and We love Dracnor deeply. It is a beautiful world, and We have seen many,"
Orgrim gasped. "You have seen other worlds?"
"Indeed We have. And We have met many people."
"People like the ores?"
Velen smiled gently. "There is no one like the ores," he said, respect resonant in his voice. "You are unique in our travels."
Durotan and Orgrim looked at each other and sat up a little straightcr in their chairs.
"But yes, we had been traveling for some time before we found this land. Here we are. and here we will stay."
Durotan burned to ask more-to ask how long they had been traveling, what their homeland had been like, why they had left it.
But there was something in Velen's timeless face that told him that although he had been invited to inquire, the draenei leader would not tell him that particular talc.
So instead he asked about how they had tamed the nature of their weapons and magic. "Our magic comes from the earth." Durotan said. "From the shaman and the ancestors."
"Our magic comes from a different source." Velen said. "I do not think you will understand it if I explained it.
Orgrim said indignantly, "We are not stupid!"
"Forgive me, I did not mean to imply that," Velen said at once. It was a
graceful and sincere apology, and again Durotan was impressed. "Your people are wise and you two are obviously bright. But... I am not sure I have the words in your language. I have no doubt that if I had the time and vocabulary you would understand."
Even in the explanation he seemed to grope for the words. Durotan thought of the sort of magic that could disguise a city, thought of the soft, uncanny metal somehow melded with gems of the earth and
solid stone, and realized that Velen was right. There did not breathe an orc who could have grasped all of this in a single evening, though he suspected Mother Kashur would have an intrinsic comprehension, and he again wondered why it was that the two races did not interact more.
The conversation turned to more mundane topics. The two youths learned that deep in the Terokkar forest was a spot, sacred to the draenei, called Auchindoun. Here, the dead were laid to rest, placed in the ground instead of being burned on pyres. Privately, Durotan thought this odd, but held his tongue. Telmor was the closest town to this "city of the dead," and Velen had come on a sad mission, to lay to rest some who had died fighting the same ogre that had almost claimed Orgrim and Durotan earlier that day.
Normally. Velen explained, he lived in a beautiful place called the Temple of Karabor. There were other draenei towns, but the largest was to the north, a place called Shattrath.
At last, the meal was over. Velen sighed, and his eyes rested on his empty plate, but Durotan felt certain the Prophet did not see it.
"You will excuse me." Velen said, rising. "It has been a long day, and I must meditate before I sleep. It has been an honor to meet you, Durotan of the Frostwolf clan, and Orgrim. of the Blackrock clan. I trust you will sleep well and deeply, safe within these walls, where none of your people has been before." Durotan and Orgrim rose with the others and bowed. Velen smiled with, Durotan thought, a hint of that strange sorrow he had glimpsed in the draenei leader earlier.
"We will meet again, young ones. Good night." The two ores left shortly afterwards. They were escorted to their rooms and indeed slept well, though Durotan had a dream of an old orc sitting quietly by his side, and wondered what it meant.
"Bring him," the old orc said to Mother Kashur.
Mother Kashur, the eldest shaman of the Frostwolf clan, slept deeply. Because of her high position of honor, her tent was second in lavishncss only to that of Garad, the clan leader. Thick rugs of clefthoof fur kept her old bones from the cold of the earth, and a loyal and loving granddaughter tended to her needs, cooking and cleaning and keeping the fire stoked on cold days for the clan's
"mother." Mother Kashur's duty was to listen to the wind and water and fire and grass, and drink the bitter herbal beverage each night that opened her mind to visits from the ancestors. She gathered information for her clan the way the others gathered fruits and firewood, and this gift nourished them as deeply.
The old orc was not present, and yet she knew he was real. He was in her dream, and that was enough for her. In this dream state, she was young and vibrant, could see her ruddy skin glowing with health, knew
her form to be sleek and knotted with muscle. The old orc was the age at which he had died, the age at which his wisdom had been at its height. His name had been Tal'kraa in life, but now, although he was many generations distant from her, she called him only Grandfather.
"You received the message," Grandfather told the young, vibrant dreamKashur. She nodded, her dark hair flowing with the movement.
"He and the Blackrock boy are with the draenei," she said. "They will be safe. I can feel it."
Grandfather Tal'kraa nodded, his thick jowls shaking with the movement. His tusks were yellowed with age and one had been broken off in a battle long
since forgotten.
"Yes, they are safe. Bring him."
It was the second time he had said this, and Kashur was not certain as to what he meant.
"He will come to the mountain in a few months, when the trees shed their leaves to sleep," she said. "So yes, I will bring him."
Tal'kraa shook his head fiercely, his brown eyes narrowed in annoyance, Kashur smothered a smile; of all the spirits that honored her with their presence. Grandfather Tal'kraa was one of the least patient.
"No, no," Tal'kraa growled. "Bring him to us. Bring him to the caverns of Oshu'gun. I would look upon him there."
Kashur inhaled swiftly. "You ... wish me to take him to meet the ancestors?" "is that not what I just said? Foolish girl! What has happened to the shaman these days?"
It was a rant he went on frequently and it troubled Kashur not in the slightest. She was too stunned by the import of what he had just said. Sometimes the ancestors had wanted to see a child before; it was infrequent, but it had occurred. Usually it meant that the child in question was destined for the shamanic path. She had not thought Durotan's feet would walk that road; it was rare that a shaman led a clan. There would be too much pulling him in each direction for him to be an effective leader. To both listen to and honor the spirits and to guide one's people well were more than most ores could manage. One who could do both would be a remarkable orc indeed.
When Kashur did not reply. Grandfather growled and slammed his staff on the ground. Kashur jumped slightly.
"I will bring him on his initiation day," Kashur assured her ancestor.
"At last, you understand," Tal'kraa said, shaking his staff at her. 'And if you
fail me, I will take my staff to your head instead of the innocent earth."
He could not completely hide a smile as he said it, and Kashur smiled back as her dream-self closed her eyes. For all his bluster and short temper, Tal'kraa was wise and kind and loved her deeply. She wished she had known him when he was alive, but he had died almost a hundred years ago.
Kashur's eyelids fluttered open, and she sighed as her spirit returned to her current, real body ... as old as Tal'kraa had been when he died, hands and feet curled up with joint pain, body weak, hair stark white. She knew in her heart that the time would soon come when she would be able to leave this body, this shell, for the final time and be with the ancestors in the sacred mountain.
Drek'Thar, her apprentice, would then be the advisor to Garad and the rest of the Frostwolf clan. She had every confidence in him, and actually looked forward to the day when she would be pure spiritual energy.
Although, she mused as the sunlight trickled in and the birdsong caressed her cars, she would miss the things that being alive granted her, the simple things like birdsong and hot food and the loving touch of her granddaughter.
Bring him, Grandfather had said.
And so she would.
FOUR
Last night, with the moon full overhead and the stars gleaming as if in approval, a young male was initiated into adulthood. It was the first time I have had the chance to be part of this ritual, the Om'riggor. In my earlier years, I was cut off from the rites and traditions of my people; and truth be told, all ores had been cut off from such rites for too long. And once I had set my feet on my destiny's path, I had become embroiled in battle. War consumed me. Ironically, the need to protect my people from the Burning Legion and to give them a place where our traditions could again flourish took me far away from these things.
But now, Durotar and Orgrimmar are established. Now, there is a peace, tenuous though it might be. Now there are shaman reclaiming the ancient ways, young males and females coming of age who, if the spirits will it, may never know the ashy taste of war.
Last night, I participated in a timeless ritual that had been denied an entire generation.
Last night, my heart was filled with joy and the sense of connection for which I had always longed.
Durotan's heart hammered in his chest as he stared at the talbuk. It was a mighty beast, worthy prey, its horns not for mere decoration but sharp and dangerous. Durotan had seen at least one warrior gored to death, impaled upon the twelve prongs as surely as if upon a spear.
And he was to take it down with only a single weapon and no armor.
There had been the whispers, of course. Any mature talbuk will do to satisfy the needs of the ritual, he had heard someone murmur in his car as he sat blindfolded in the waiting tent. They are all fierce fighters, but at this season, the males have shed their horns.
Other whispers: You may only carry one weapon, Durotan, son of Garad; but you could hide armor in the wilderness where no one would know.
And, most shameful of all: Theshaman will determine if you are successful by tasting the blood upon your face; the blood from a long-dead talbuk tastes exactly like that of one freshly slain. He ignored all the temptations. Perhaps there had been other ores who had succumbed to them, but he would not be among them.
Durotan would seek out a female, who was quite well equipped with horns at this time of year; he would take the one weapon he was permitted, and it would be the blood of the beast hekilled, steaming in the cold air, that would anoint his checks.
And now. standing in the early, unexpected fall of snow, his axe growing ever heavier in his hand, Durotan shivered. But he never faltered.
He had been tracking the talbuk herd for two days now, surviving only on what he could gather, creating meager fires in the twilight that bathed the snow in a rich lavender hue and sleeping in what shelter he stumbled upon. Orgrim had already completed his rite of passage. Durotan envied the fact that his friend had been born in summer. He had thought it would still not be too difficult in early autumn, but winter had decided to come ahead of time and the weather was bitter.
It seemed as if the talbuk herd, too, was taunting him. He could come upon their tracks and droppings easily enough, see where they had scraped the snow for dried grass or pulled bark from the trees. But they always seemed to elude him. It was late afternoon on the third day when it appeared as though the ancestors had decided to reward his determination. Twilight was coming, and Durotan had thought with a sinking heart that he would have to again seek shelter to mark the end of a fruidess day.
Then he realized that the small pellets of dung were not frozen hard, but fresh.
They were close.
He began to run, the snow squeaking beneath his fur boots, a new warmth filling him. He followed the tracks as he had been taught, cleared a rise-
And beheld a herd of the glorious creatures.
Immediately he crouched behind a large boulder and peered around to gaze at the beasts. They were still dark brown against the white snow, their winter coats not yet upon them. There were at least two dozen, maybe more, mostly females. It was good that he had found the herd, but now he had another problem. How would he take down just one? Talbuk. unlike many prey animals, would protect others in their herd. If he attacked one. the rest would come to defend it.
Shaman accompanied the hunters in order to distract the animals. Durotan was alone, and suddenly he felt very vulnerable.
He frowned and rallied himself. He had been searching for these creatures for almost three days, and now here they were.
Nightfall would see a fresh haunch of meat devoured by a hungry orc youth, or it would see a stiffening orc corpse in the snow.
He watched them for a while, aware that the shadows were lengthening, but not wanting to hurry and make a fatal mistake. The talbuk were diurnal creatures, and they were busy digging hollows in the snow in which to curl up. He knew they did such a thing, but now he watched in dismay as they settled in tightly against one another. How would he separate one?
Movement caught his eye. One of the females, young and healthy from a gentle summer spent feasting on sweet grass and berries, seemed to be in a feisty mood. She stamped and tossed her head-crowned with a glorious set of horns-and almost danced
around the others. She did not seem inclined to join them, but like one or two others, opted to sleep on the outside of the cluster of furry bodies.
Durotan began to grin. What an offering from the spirits! It was a good omen. The liveliest, healthiest doc in the herd, the one who did not need to follow mindlessly, but chose her own path. While that choice would likely be her death, it would also give Durotan a chance to win his honor and right to be treated as an adult. The spirits understood the balance of such things. At least, he was told they did.
Durotan waited. Twilight came and went, and the sun sank below the mountains. With the sun went even the feeble warmth it had hitherto provided. Durotan waited with the patience of the predator. Finally, even the edgiest of the herd tucked up its long legs and bedded down with its fellows.
At last, Durotan moved. His limbs were stiff and he almost stumbled. He crept slowly from his hiding place behind the boulder and went down the
slope, his eyes on the drowsing female. Her head drooped on its long neck, and her breathing was regular. He could see small white puffs appearing in front of her muzzle.
Slowly, placing his feet as carefully as he could, he moved toward his quarry. He did not feel the cold; the heat of anticipation, the powerful focus, drove any sensations of discomfort away. Closer still he came, and still the talbukdoc dreamed.
He lifted his axe. He swung it down.
Her eyes opened. She tried to scramble to her feet, but the death blow had already come. Durotan wanted to scream the battle cry he had heard his father utter so many times, but he bit it back. It would not do to slay the talbuk only to be slain himself by a dozen of her herd in retaliation. He had sharpened the blade to shocking keenness, and it sliced through the thick neck and vertebrae as if slicing through cheese. Blood spurted, the warm sticky fluid spattering Durotan gently, and he smiled fiercely. Anointing himself with the blood of his first solo kill was part of the ritual; the talbuk doc had done it for him. Another good omen.
Silent though he had tried to be, he heard the sounds of the awakening herd. He whirled, breathing heavily, and let loose with the blood-chilling battle cry his throat had been aching to utter. He held his axe, the gleam of its metal blade now obscured with crimson blood, and bellowed again.
The talbuk hesitated. He had been told that if it was a clean kill, they would flee rather than attack, intuiting on some primal level that they could no longer help their fallen sister. He hoped this was true; he might be able to take down one or two, but would fall beneath their padded feet if they chose to attack.
Moving as one, they began to back away, and then finally whirled and turned to run. He watched them gallop over the rise to disappear, their pawprints in the pristine snow the only evidence that they had been here.
Durotan lowered his axe, panting with exertion. He raised it again and let out a cry of triumph. His empty belly would be full tonight; the spirit of the talbuk would enter his dreams. And on the morrow he would return to his people an adult male, ready to take his place in serving the clan.
Ready to one day become its leader.
"Why do we not ride?" Durotan asked petulantly, glowering like a child.
"Because that is not the way it is done," Mother Kashur said curtly. Irritated, she cufFcd the boy. Durotan was young and fit; the lengthy hike to the sacred mountain of the ancestors was as nothing to him. She, on the other hand, would have deeply appreciated being able to ride atop her great black wolf Dreamwalker. But the traditions were ancient and specific, and as long as she was able to walk, walk she would. Durotan bowed his head in acknowledgement as They continued on.
Despite the fact that each trip exhausted her more than the previous one, Mother Kashur felt a sense of excitement that helped temper the pain and weariness. She had taken many a youngling-both male and female, for each was as valued as the other-on this final part of their rite of adulthood. But never before had she been asked to bring one before the ancestors. She was not too old to be curious.
It was less than a few hours for the young, about a day for the older bones to make the trip. Evening was coming and they were almost there. Mother Kashur looked up at the familiar shape of the mountain and smiled. Unlike other mountain ranges, whose angles seemed to be random. Oshu'gun's spire was a perfect triangle. Gleaming like crystal, its facets catching the sun. it resembled the surrounding terrain not at all. It had come from the heavens, long ago, and the spirits had been drawn to it. It was for this reason the ores had settled here, in its sacred shadow. Whatever squabbles and petty differences they had as living beings, they were as one here, inside this mountain. She would go there again soon, she knew, but not as a hobbling, elderly woman. This was her last visit in such a broken vessel. The next time Kashur approached Oshu'gun, she would come as a spirit, floating in the air
as the birds did, her heart light and clean and made new.
"What's wrong, Mother?" Durotan asked, concern in his young voice. She blinked, coming out of her reverie, and smiled at him.
"Not a thing," she assured him truthfully.
The shadows had chased away the sunlight by the time they reached the foot of the mountain. They would sleep here tonight and begin their ascent at dawn. Durotan fell asleep first, wrapped in the hide of the talbuk doc he himself had slain not too long ago, and Mother Kashur watched him fondly as he slept the deep sleep of the innocent. She herself would have no dreams; her mind needed to be clear if she was to be ready to receive visions on the morrow.
The climb was a long, tiring one, harder by far than the simple hike to reach the mountain, and Kashur was grateful both for her sturdy staff and Durotan's strong hand. But today, Kashur's feet seemed to move more surely her lungs work more efficiently as she and her young charge climbed. She felt as if the ancestors were pulling her forward, aiding her physical body with the power of their spirit ones.
They paused at the entrance of the sacred cave. It was a perfect oval in the smooth surface of the mountain, and as always, Kashur felt as though she were entering the womb of the earth. Durotan tried to look brave, but succeeded only in looking slighdy nervous. Mother Kashur did not smile at him. He should be nervous. He was about to enter sacred space at the specific request of one of his long-dead ancestors. Even she was not unmoved.
She lit a bundle of dried grasses that gave off a sweet, pungent scent, and waved the smoke over him to purify him. Then she marked him with the blood his own father had shed for this moment, kept carefully in a small stoppered leather bag. Kashur placed her withered hand upon his smooth, low brow, murmured her blessing, and then nodded.
"You well know that few are called before the ancestors who do not walk the path of the shaman," she said
gravely. Brown eyes wide, Durotan nodded. "I do not know what will happen. Maybe nothing. But if something occurs, you know to behave with honor and respect to the beloved dead."
Durotan swallowed and nodded again. Then he took a deep breath and stood straight and tall, and in the yet-unmolded body of the boy, Kashur saw a hint of the clan chieftain to come.
Together, they went inside, Mother Kashur going first to light the torches that lined the walls. The orange illumination showed them the downward twining path, worn smooth by years of bare or booted orc feet. Here and there steps had been carved, to make those pilgrim's feet more secure. It was always cool inside this tunnel, warmer than it was outside in winter. Kashur let her hand brush the sides of the wall, remembering the first time she had come here long ago, the blood of her mother wet on her own face, her eyes wide, her heart racing.
Finally, the long, gentle downward slope cased. There were no more torches on the wall to light, and Durotan looked at her, puzzled.
"We will not need to bring fire to come before the ancestors," Kashur said. They continued on a level surface, traveling into darkness. Durotan was not frightened, but he did look confused as they left the comfort of fire behind.
Now it was completely dark. Kashur reached out a hand and grasped Durotan's to guide him. His strong. stubby fingers folded gently around hers. Even now, when he might be expected to clutch my hand, he remembers how it aches, she thought. The next Frostwolf chieftain would have a considerate heart.
They continued without speaking. And then ... subtly, like the arrival of dawn after a long, dark night, light began to grow around them. Now Kashur could dimly see the shape of the youth who stood beside her, so much younger than she and yet already walking in the body of a grown male. She watched him as they moved forward; the miracle of the cave of the ancestors was familiar to her, but Durotan's reaction was not.
His eyes widened and he inhaled swiftly as he looked around. The glow emanated from a pool in the center of the cavern, casting a soft white light over everything. All was smooth and soft and dimly radiant; there were no sharp angles or rough places, and Kashur felt the familiar sensation of deep peace wash over her. She let Durotan look his fill in silence. The cavern was huge, larger than the main drumming and dancing area at the Kosh'harg festival, and branching tunnels led to places that Kashur had never dared explore. It would have to be so large, would it not, to be able to host the spirit of every orc who had lived and died?
She walked to the water and he followed her, watching her closely. She removed the pack she carried and gestured that he do likewise. Carefully, Kashur removed several watcrskins, opened them, and with a soft prayer added their water to the glowing liquid.
"You asked about the watcrskins as we departed," she said quietly to Durotan, "The water in here is not native to this place. Long ago, we began offering blessed water to the spirits. Every time we come, we contribute to the sacred pool. And even so, I know not how, the water docs not dissipate as it would in an ordinary hollow. Such is the power of the Mountain of Spirits."
Once she had emptied the watcrskins, she sat down with a soft grunt and peered into the luminous depths. Durotan emulated her.
She knew the angle at which she could see her reflection and made sure they were both positioned correctly. At first, all she could see was her own face and that of Durotan. Their features looked spectral themselves, reflected in a white pool rather than a dark one.
Then a third figure joined them, as if Grandfather Tal'kraa were standing right beside her shoulder, his reflection as clear as theirs.
Their eyes met, and Kashur smiled.
She craned her neck to look up at him, but Durotan continued to gaze into the water as if searching for the answers there. Kashur's heart sank a little, but immediately she reprimanded herself. If Durotan was not of the shamanic
path, then he was not of the shamanic path. Surely his destiny would be an honorable one regardless, born to lead his clan as he had been.
"My many times great granddaughter," Tal'kraa said with more gentleness than Kashur had ever heard from him before. "You have brought him, as I asked." Leaning heavily on a staff as insubstantial as he, the spirit of the Grandfather moved in a slow circle around Durotan as the young orc continued to look into the water. Kashur watched both Frostwolf males closely. Durotan shivered and looked about, no doubt wondering where the sudden chill came from. Kashur smiled to herself. He could not see his ancestor's spirit, but he knew, somehow, that Tal'kraa was there.
"You cannot see him," she said a bit sadly,
Durotan's head came up and his nostrils flared. Swiftly, he got to his feet. In the eerie light, his tusks looked blue and his skin had a green cast to it.
"No, Mother. I cannot. But ... is an ancestor present?"
"Indeed he is," Kashur said. She turned her attention to the ghost. "I did bring him here, as you requested. How do you find him?"
Durotan swallowed hard, but remained standing straight and tall as the spirit circled him thoughtfully.
"I sensed . . . something," Tal'kraa said. "I had thought he would be a shaman, but if he cannot see me now, then he never will. But although he will not see spirits or summon the elements, he is born to a great destiny. He will be an important asset to the Frostwolf clan ... indeed, to all his people."
"He will be ... a hero?" Kashur asked, her breath catching. All ores strove to uphold a code of courage and honor, but only a few were powerful enough to have their names engraved upon the memory of their
descendants. At her words Durotan inhaled swiftly, and she could see the wanting on his face.
"I cannot tell," said Tal'kraa, frowning a little. "Teach him well, Kashur, for one thing is certain: From his line will come salvation."
In a gesture of tenderness the likes of which Kashur had never seen, Tal'kraa reached out and brushed an insubstantial finger across Durotan's check, Durotan's eyes went wide and Kashur could see he had to fight the natural instinct to draw back, but Durotan did not quail beneath the spectral caress.
Then, like mist on a hot day, Tal'kraa was gone. Kashur stumbled a little; she always forgot how the energy of the spirits fed her.
Durotan stepped forward quickly to catch her arm, and she was grateful for his youthful strength.
"Mother, are you all right?" he asked. She gripped his arm and nodded. His first concern was for her, not for what the ancestor might or might not have said about him. Even as she pondered the words, she decided not to tell Durotan of them. Level-headed and great-hearted though he was, such a prophecy could corrupt even the truest of orcish hearts.
From his line will come salvation.
"I am all right," she reassured him, "But these bones are no longer young, and the energy of the spirits is powerful,"
"I wish I could have seen him," Durotan said a bit wistfully. "But. .. but I know I felt him." "You did, and that is more than most are honored with." Kashur said.
"Mother . . . can you tell me what he said? About- about me being a hero?"
He was trying to act calm and mature, but a note of pleading crept in. She did not blame him. All wanted to live on in glorious memory, through tales told of their adventures. He would not be an orc if he did not share that desire.
"Grandfather Tal'kraa said it was uncertain," she said bluntly. He nodded and hid his disappointment well. That much was all she had planned to say, but
something moved her to add, "You have a destiny to fulfill, Durotan, son of Garad. Be not a fool in battle and die before you can fulfill it."
He chuckled then. "A fool docs not serve his clan well, and that is what I wish to do."
"Then, future chieftain," said Kashur, chuckling also, "you had best be about finding a mate."
And she laughed out loud as, for the first time on their journey together, Durotan looked completely unnerved.
Five
Upon reflection, so Drek'Tliar tells me, this time in our history was as a perfect day in early summer. We ores had everything we truly needed: a hospitable world, the ancestors to guide us, the elements to aid us as they saw fit. Food was plentiful, our enemies were fierce but not invincible, and we were rich with blessings. If the draenei were not necessarily our allies, neither were they foe. They shared their knowledge and their bounty whenever they were asked; it was we, the orcs,who always held back. And it is we, the orcs,who would unwittingly be twisted to serve another's end.
Hate is powerful. Hate can be eternal. Hate can be manipulated.
And hate can be created.
In the darkness visible, ageless, timeless, Kil'jaeden dwelt. The power surged and throbbed through him, better than blood now, more nourishing than meat or drink, heady and calming at the same time. He was not omnipotent, not yet, or else worlds would fall before him with a thought rather than through battle and destruction, and on the whole, he was content with this.
But they yet lived, die exiles. Kil'jaeden could sense them, though centuries had passed according to those to whom time still mattered. They were lying low, Velen and die rest of the fools. Too cowardly to face him and Archimonde, who had worked as his friend and ally through the . . . changes
... as he had when they were simple beings.
He, Archimonde, and the others no longer thought of themselves as "credar." Velen would call them "man'ari," but they called themselves the Burning Legion. Sargeras's army. The chosen ones.
He extended a scarlet hand, long and elegant and clawed, into the nothingness that was everything and felt it ripple beneath his inquiry. Scouts had been dispatched the moment the enemy had escaped, scouts who reported nothing but failure. Archimonde wanted them to die for their lack of success, but Kil'jaeden opted otherwise. Those who feared, fled, he had good cause to know.
Those who sniffed reward and their lord's approval stayed, hungering for it. So while Kil'jaeden made his disapproval known, those who had failed him usually got a second chance. Or third, if he believed them to be doing all they could and not simply coasting on his goodwill.
Archimonde disagreed on this obsession that occupied Kil'jaeden.
"There are worlds aplenty to conquer and devour, in service to our master Sargeras," Archimonde rumbled. The blackness glowed around them as his voice pierced it. "Let the fool go. We would sense it if he used his talents on any level that would pose a threat.
Let him rot on some world, bereft of everything that mattered to him."
Kil'jaeden slowly turned his massive head to regard the other demon lord.
"It is not about rendering him powerless," Kil'jaeden hissed. "It is about destroying him and those foolish enough to have followed him. It is about crushing him for his lack of faith. For his stubbornness. For his refusal to think about what was best for all of us."
The large, clawed hand turned into a fist and the sharp nails dug into the palm. Molten fire poured forth, then the flow stopped as it hit what passed for air, leaving a thick ridge like a scar. Kil'jaeden's body was covered with
many such welts; he took pride in them.
Archimonde was powerful, elegant, smooth, intelligent. But he lacked the burning desire for utter obliteration that Kil'jaeden nursed. He had explained it time and again, and now simply sighed and opted not to discuss the matter further. For centuries now, they had had this argument; no doubt they would continue to have it for centuries more ... or until Kil'jaeden succeeded in the destruction of the being who had once been his closest friend. Perhaps that was it. Kil'jaeden mused with a sudden enlightenment.
Archimonde had never had particular feelings for Velen other than as a fellow leader of the eredar. Kil'jaeden had loved Velen as a brother, closer than that, loved him almost as another aspect of himself
And then . ..
Again the huge hand clenched, and again unholy fire poured forth in lieu of blood.
No.
It would not be enough to think of Velen sitting on some backwater world, nursing his hurt pride, living off the land in some cave.
Kil'jaeden once would have said he wanted blood. But blood, powerful in its own way as it was, would not satisfy him now. He wanted the essence of shame, of utter and complete humiliation. That would be even sweeter than the copperytaste of life flowing from Velen and his stupid followers.
Archimonde tilted his head, a gesture Kil'jaeden recognized. One of his own servants was speaking to him. Archimonde had his own schemes and machinations, all, like Kil'jaeden's, in service to their dark master and his ultimate conquest. Without a word Archimonde rose to his full, imposing height and departed, his movements lithe and sleek, belying his size.
At that moment as well, Kil'jaeden felt a slight scratching inside his head. He recognized it as once: it was Talgath, ever his right hand, seeking contact.
And the sensation emanating from the thought was one of cautious hope.
What is it, my friend? Speak! Kil'jaeden commanded in his mind.
My great lord, I do not wish to plant false hope, but. .. I may have found them.
Tempered delight rose inside Kil'jaeden. Like the being he hunted, Talgath was ever the cautious one of his minions. Only a little lower in rank than Kil'jaeden himself, he had proved his loyalty over the centuries. He would not say even this guarded statement without good cause.
Where? And what makes you sense this?
There is a small world, primitive and insignificant. And I have sensed their peculiar brand of magic Minting the area. It is possible that they may have come and gone. Such, alas, has happened before.
Kil'jaeden nodded, even though Talgath was not present to see the gesture. Some things from his past yet lingered, he thought, smiling a litdc at the ancient movement that betokened agreement in nearly every sentient species he had encountered.
You speak truly, he acknowledged. Many times before, Kil'jaeden's forces had arrived on some world or other, lured by the sweet essence of eredar magic, only to find that somehow Velen and his wretched followers had gotten wind of the approach and escaped. But I remain hopeful. I will find them and twist them to my purposes, and I have eternity in wnicJi to do so.
A thought occurred to him. So often before, Kil'jaeden's forces had descended upon a world where Velen was thought to be. only to have him escape. Kil'jaeden had nursed his insulted pride by destroying such worlds, but the slaughter of primitive races-
though pleasant-did not slake his demonic thirst for complete and total revenge.
He would not behave that way this time. He would not send Talgath at the head of the Burning Legion. Velen had once been the strongest of them, the wisest, the most attuned to magic and science. Kil'jaeden could not imagine that his old friend would have dropped his guard, not after such a relatively brief time. Velen would be constantly on the alert, ready to flee in the face of so obvious a threat.
But... what about a less obvious threat?
Talgath . . . I want you to investigate this world for me.
My lord? Talgath's mental voice was smooth and poised, but puzzled.
We have descended upon worlds in force before, and to no avail. Perhaps this time, only one is sent. One only, but one who can be trusted completely.
Kil'jaeden sensed unease and pride warring in Talgath's thoughts.
There are more ways to destroy one's enemy than with an army. Sometimes, those ways are better.
You- you wish me to find such a better way, then?
Precisely Visit this place on your own. Learnaboutit. Investigate. Tell me if the exiles are truly there, and if so, what their state is.
Tell me what they live on, if they are fat and settled like tamed livestock or lean and edgy, like prey ani
mals. Tell me what their world is like, what other peoples live there, what creatures, what seasons. Investigate, Talgath. Do nothing without express orders from me.
Of course, my lord. I shall prepare at once. Still puzzled, but obedient and intelligent. Talgath had served the man'ari master well in the past. Now he would serve well again.
Kil'jaeden's face, though it little resembled what it had been before he had
cast his lot with the great lord Sargeras. was still able to twist into the facsimile of a smile.
Durotan, like all his people, had been ready to begin training with weapons at the age of six. His body was already tall and filling out, and the usage of weaponry came naturally to his people. At twelve, he had gone with the hunting parties. And now, after the rite that marked him as an adult, he had been able to join in the hunt for the ogres and their obscene, twisted masters, the gronn.
This year, as the autumn Kosh'harg came, he joined the adults in the circle after the children had been sent to bed. And as he and Orgrim had learned years before, being an adult and being able to attend the fireside circle was not very interesting.
However, the one thing he did find interesting, as he watched with observant brown eyes, was interacting with those whose names he had known for many years, but who never spoke much to him because of his youth. Mother Kashur, of course, was from his own dan. He knew she had high standing among the shaman of the other clans, and he took pride in that fact. He noticed her huddled by the fire on this first night, a woven blanket wrapped around a frame that seemed to him little more than bone and skin.
He knew, without knowing how he knew, that this would be her last Kosh'harg celebration, and the thought saddened him more than he had expected.
Next to her. younger than she but older still than Durotan's parents, was Kashur's apprentice Drek'Thar. Durotan had not spoken much with Drek'Thar, but the older ore's sharp tongue and sharp eyes were deserving of much respect. Durotan's brown eyes continued to roam over the assembled company. Tomorrow, the shaman would be gone, departing for their meetings with the ancestors in the cavern of the sacred mountain. Durotan shivered as he again recalled his visit there, and the cold breeze that felt like a draft, but was nothing so ordinary.
Over there was Grom Hcllscrcam. the young and slightly manic chieftain of
the Warsong clan. Only a few years older than Durotan and Orgrim, he was new to his position. There had been muttcrings about the mysterious circumstances under which the former chieftain had died, but the Warsong clan did not challenge Grom's leadership. Durotan thought it no wonder. Though youthful, Grom was intimidating. The dancing, flickering light of the fire only served to make
him look more menacing. Thick black hair flowed down his back. Upon his ascension to chieftainship, Grom's jaw had been tattooed a uniform shade of black. Around his neck hung a necklace of bones. Durotan knew their meaning: Among the Warsong, it was tradition that a young warrior wear the bones of his first kill, inscribed with his personal runes.
Beside Grom was the enormous, imposing Blackhand of the Blackrock clan. Next to Blackhand, munching in silence, was the chieftain of the Shattered Hand clan, Kargath Bladcfist. In lieu of a hand, he had a scythe embedded in his wrist, and even now as an adult Durotan found himself unsettled as the blade glinted in the firelight. Next to him was Kilrogg Dcadcyc, chieftain of the Bleeding Hollow clan. The name was not a familial one. but one he had taken for himself. One eye flitted over the assembled company; the other sat, mangled and dead in truth, in its socket. If Grom was young for a chieftain, then Kilrogg was old for one.
but it was clear to Durotan that despite his years and grizzled appearance, Kilrogg was far from done with cither life or leadership.
Uneasily Durotan turned his attention elsewhere.
On Drek'Thar's left was the famous Ner'zhul of the Shadowmoon clan. For as long as Durotan could remember, Ner'zhul had led the shaman. Once. Durotan had been permitted to attend a hunt at which Ner'zhul had been present, and the mastery this shaman had over his skills was shocking. While others grunted and labored to contact the elements, directing them powerfully but without grace, Ner'zhul remained tranquil. The earth shook beneath him when he asked it; lightning came from the skies to strike where he directed. Fire, air, water, earth, and the elusive Spirit of the Wilds all called him
companion and friend. He had not seen Ner'zhul interact with the ancestors, of course; no one but shaman were witness to such things. But it was clear to Durotan that if the ancestors had not favored Ner'zhul, he would not have serenely carried power all this time.
Ner'zhul's apprentice, however, Durotan did not like. Orgrim was sitting next to his boyhood friend, and, seeing where Durotan's gaze led, leaned over and whispered, "I think that Gul'dan would better serve his people if he were set out as bait."
Durotan looked away so that no one else would see him smile. He did not know how experienced Gul'dan was as a shaman; surely he must have some ability or else Ner'zhul would not have taken him on to succeed him. But he was not a very prepossessing ore.
Shorter than many, softer than most, with a shoit, bushy beard, he did not exemplify the orc as a warrior. But Durotan supposed that one did not have to be a hero to contribute.
"Now that one, she is a warrior born."
Durotan looked in the direction that Orgrim had indicated and his eyes widened slightly. Orgrim had spoken the truth. Standing tall and straight, her muscles rippling beneath smooth brown skin in the firelight as
she reached and sliced a chunk of meat off the roasting talbuk carcass, the female in question seemed to Durotan to be the epitome of all the ores valued. She moved with the feral grace of one of the black wolves, and her tusks were small but sharpened to deadly points. Her long black hair was pulled back in an efficient but attractive braid.
"Who-who is she?" Durotan murmured, his heart already sinking. Surely this magnificent female was a member of another clan.
He would have noticed if such a beauty-strong, supple, graceful-had been in his own clan.
Orgrim guffawed and slapped Durotan on the back. The sound and gesture caused several heads to turn in their direction, including, Durotan realized, that of the lovely female. Orgrim leaned in to whisper the words that made Durotan's spirits rise.
"You unobservant dog! She is a Frostwolf! I'd have claimed her for myself if she were of my own clan."
A Frostwolf? How in the world had Durotan failed to notice such a treasure in his own clan? He turned his gaze from Orgrim's grinning visage to look at her again. He found her staring directly at him. Their gazes locked.
"Draka!"
The female started and turned away. Durotan blinked, as if returning to himself.
"Draka," he said quietly. No wonder he had not recognized her. "No, Orgrim. She was not a warrior born. She is a warrior made."
Draka had been born sickly, her skin a pale fawn color rather than the healthy tree-bark brown that marked most ores. For most of his childhood. Durotan remembered the adults speaking of her in low whispers, as of one already on the way to joining the ancestors. His own parents once spoke of her sadly, wondering what her family had done that the spirits would curse them with such a frail child.
It was soon after that. Durotan realized, putting the pieces together, that Draka's family had moved to the outskirts of the encampment. He had not seen much of her, busy as he was with his own duties.
Draka had sliced off several chunks of meat and brought them back to her family. Durotan noticed two younglings sitting with the ores who presumably were her parents. Both looked fit and healthy. Feeling her gaze upon him. Draka turned her head and met his eyes steadily. Her nostrils flared and she sat up straightcr. as if daring Durotan to look upon her with pity and compassion rather than admiration and respect.
No, this one did not need any pity. By the grace of the spirits, the healing of the shaman, and the power of the will he could see burning in her brown eyes, she had cast off her childhood frailty to mature into this ... this vision of female orc perfection.
His breath escaped him in a whoosh as Orgrim elbowed him. Durotan glared at his childhood friend.
"Stop gaping, it makes me want to put something in your mouth to shut it," Orgrim grumbled.
Two
I remember when we first encountered the tauren. I remember Cairne Bloodhoof's deep voice and calm face. I remember sitting oit the ground in a tent that could be broken down and erected with startling speed, and feeling oddly at home. We smoked pipes, shared food and drink, felt the drumming in our bones, and talked. The tauren seemed to me bestial at first, but there was wisdom and humor in them, and by the time the first round of negotiations had been conducted, I knew that the ores had a rare ally in these half-bovine beings.
Night had fallen while we spoke, a soft night befitting this beautiful land. We left the tent and gazed up at stars too numerous too count, a sweet wind caressing our faces. I turned to Drek'Thar, to ask for his wisdom. To my astonishment I saw tears on his face, glinting in the moon's light.
"This is how we used to be, my chieftain," he said in a broken voice. He lifted his arms and tilted his head back, calling the wind to embrace him and dry the tears on his strong green face. "Close to the earth. Close to the spirits. Strong in the hunt, gentle with the younglings, knowing our place in the world to be right and just. Understanding the balance of taking and giving. The only magic the tauren practice is the good, clean magic of the earth, and the land reflects that, the way Draenor once reflected our connection."
I thought of the tauren's request for aid infighting their enemy, the vile, filthy centaur.
"Yes . . . I feel for them. It will be good to be able to help them," I said.
Drek 'Thar laughed, turning his blind eyes to me and seeing me more clearly than anyone with sight could.
"Oh, my young Thrall," he said, chuckling still, "you do not yet understand. They will help us."
Durotan ran as fast as his powerful young legs could carry him. His breath came fast, and sweat dappled his reddish-brown skin, but he forced himself to keep going. It was summer, and his large, flat feet were bare. The grass was soft beneath him as he ran, and occasionally he would step on the bright purple blossom of a dassanflower. The scent from the bruised plant traditionally cultivated for healing wafted up like a blessing, inspiring him to run even farther, even faster.
Now he was on the fringe of the Terokkar forest, pushing forward into its cool, gray-green depths. He had to watch out for the twining roots of the elegant trees lest he trip over them, and his pace perforce slowed. Soft lights glowed in the green heart of this forest, and the calm it exuded was at sharp odds with Durotan's need for triumph. He increased his pace, leaping over fallen tree trunks covered with moss, ducking under low-slung branches with the grace of a talbuk. His black hair, long and thick and spilling all the way to the middle of his back, flew behind him. His lungs burned and his legs cried out for him to cease, but he ground his teeth and ignored the pleas from his body. He was a Frostwolf, the heir to clan chieftaincy, and no Blackrock would possibly-
Durotan heard a fair approximation of a war cry behind him and his heart sank. Orgrim's voice, like Durotan's, was still sinking toward the deep bellow that marked an adult male, but even Durotan had to admit it was already impressive. He willed his legs to pump even harder, but they felt as heavy and unmoving as if they had been carved of stone. He watched in dismay out of the corner of his eye as Orgrim came into his field of vision and then, with a final spurt of energy, raced past him.
The Blackrock orc extended his arm and lunged, managing to hit the tree trunk in the clearing that they had decided represented the goal of the race right before Durotan did. Orgrim kept going for several more strides, as if his powerful legs, once put into motion, were reluctant to stop. Durotan's legs had no such problems, and the heir to the Frostwolf clan fell forward, barely catching himself. He lay facedown in the cool, sweet-smelling mossy earth, gasping for air,
knowing he should sit up, knowing he should challenge Orgrim again, but too exhausted to do anything other than lie on the forest floor and recover.
Beside him, he heard Orgrim doing likewise, and then the other orc youth rolled over on his back and began to laugh. Durotan joined in. The birds and small animals that inhabited the Terokkar forest were silent as two ores uttered sounds of mirth that, Durotan thought as his lips curled past his stillforming tusks, probably sounded more than a little like the fierce war cries that presaged a hunt.
"Ha," grunted Orgrim, sitting up and punching Durotan in a playful manner. "It is little effort to beat a stripling like you.
Durotan."
"You have so much muscle your brain is starved," Durotan retorted. "Skill is as important as power. But the Blackrock clan wouldn't know about such things."
There was no malice in their banter. Their clans had been troubled at first by the friendship between the two youths, but Durotan's stubborn argument- that just because something had never been done before did not mean it could not be done-amused and
impressed the leaders of both clans. It helped that both the Frostwolves and the Blackrocks were both traditionally even-tempered orc clans. Had Durotan proposed such a friendship with a Warsong clan member or a Bonechewer, for example, known for their intense clan pride and distrust of others, the little flame of friendship would have died quickly. So the elders watched. and waited for the novelty to fade and for each youth to return to his rightful place and keep the familiar order that had been established for...
as long as anyone could recall.
They were disappointed.
The frost of late winter had given way to spring and now the full blowsy
warmth of summer, and the friendship continued.
Durotan knew that they were watched, but as long as no one interfered, he did not object.
Durotan closed his eyes and let his fingers spread over the moss. The shaman said that all things had a life, a power, a spirit. They were deeply involved with the spirits of the elements-earth, air, fire, and water-and the Spirit of the Wilds-and claimed they could sense the life force in earth and even seemingly dead stone. All Durotan could feel was the cool, slightly moist sensation of moss and soil beneath his palms.
The earth shuddered. His eyes snapped open.
He bolted upright, his hand automatically going for the spiked club that he constantly carried. Orgrim preferred a heavy metal and wood hammer, the traditional weapon of the Blackrocks and a simplified version of the legendary hammer that would one day come to him. The two boys exchanged glances. They did not need to speak to communicate. Was the thing that made the earth shake so an enormous clefthoof, with its shaggy pelt that made magnificent blankets and rich
red flesh that could feed almost the whole clan, or was it something more dangerous?
What did live in the Terokkar forest, anyway? They had been here only once before....
They got to their feet in unison, their small dark eyes peering into the now ominous-seeming dark corners of the close-growing trees, searching for whatever had made the noise.
Boom. The earth shuddered again. Durotan's heart started to beat faster. If it was a small clefthoof, maybe they could take it down together and share the spoils with both clans. He glanced over at Orgrim and saw the other's eyes gleam with excitement.
Boom.
Boom.
Crash.
Both youths gasped and then retreated as the noise came closer. A tree only a few yards away from them seemed to splinter before their eyes. The thing that had made the noise and so casually dispatched an ancient tree suddenly came into view.
It was enormous, it carried a club as big as they were, and it was most definitely not a clefthoof.
And it had seen them.
It opened its mouth and bellowed something that was vaguely intelligible, but Durotan wasn't about to waste time figuring out what it had said.
Their thoughts as one, the two boys turned and fled.
Now Durotan wished desperately that they had not decided to challenge one another to a race earlier, for his legs had not hilly recovered. Yet still they moved when he asked it of them, the need for survival lending him energy.
How had they wandered so far into ogre territory? And where were the gronn? Durotan imagined one of the ogre's masters forcing its way through the trees as the ogre had-towering over ordinary ogres as ogres towered over the orcs,even more hideous than an ogre, more of the earth than of flesh and yet so terribly wrong, its one eye bloodshot and staring as it pointed at Durotan and Orgrim and directed the ogre toward it.
He and Orgrim were not yet of the season where they would be initiated into adulthood and permitted to go with the warriors of the clans to hunt the ogres and, on rare occasions, the gronn themselves. They had gone on hunts that their clans had perceived as less dangerous, for talbuk and other easy prey, but Durotan had always yearned for the day when he would be allowed to
tackle these fearsome creatures, winning honor for himself and his clan.
Now, he wasn't so sure. The earth continued to tremble, and the shouts of the ogre were coming more clearly now.
"Crush little ores! Me smash!" The roar that followed this almost made his ears bleed.
The thing was gaining on them. Despite his brain's panicked orders to his body to run faster, faster curse
you, he could not put any distance between him and the monstrous being that loomed so close that its vast shadow almost blotted out what little light filtered through the tree branches.
The trees thinned and the light grew brighter. They were close to the edge of the forest now. Durotan kept running and burst into the open space of the meadow, his feet falling again on soft grass, Orgrim was ahead of him, but not by much. Despair washed through Durotan, followed hard by a black wave of fury.
They were not yet adults! They had not gone on their first real hunt, they had not danced by the fire with the females, they had not bathed their faces in the steaming blood of their first solo kills. There was so much they had not done. To die a glorious death in battle was one thing, but Theywere so overpowered by the hideous creature as to make their deaths humorous rather than honorable.
Knowing it could cost him precious seconds, but unable to resist the impulse, Durotan turned his head to scream a curse at the ogre before it smashed him as flat as a graincake with its club.
What he saw made his jaw drop.
Their rescuers did not utter a sound. They moved in silence, a quiet tide of blue and white and silver that seemingly sprang out of the very air. Durotan heard the familiar whine of arrows shrieking through the air and a heartbeat
later the ogre's cries were tinged not with rage but with pain. Dozens of arrows, tiny things on that massive pale body, sprouted from it, and it halted its deadly progress. It yelled and tried to brush the irritations from its skin.
A clear voice rang out. Even though he did not understand the language, Durotan recognized words of power when he heard them, and his skin prickled. Suddenly the sky was filled with lightning. But this was unlike any lightning Durotan had seen invoked by a shaman. Blue and white and silver energy crackled around the ogre, swirling about it and closing in on it like a net. The monster bellowed again and fell. The earth shook.
Now the draenei, their bodies covered in some sort of metallic plating that reflected the cool hues of the magical energies in a display that dazzled Durotan's eyes, dismounted and descended upon the fallen ogre. Blades flashed, more words of power and command were uttered, and Durotan was forced to shut his eyes or be driven mad by the display.
At last silence fell. Durotan opened his eyes again to see that the ogre was dead. Its eyes still stared, its tongue protruded from its parted lips, and its body was covered with red blood and black burn marks.
So great was the silence that Durotan could hear his own ragged breathing and that of Orgrim. The two looked at each other, stunned by what they had just witnessed.
Both had seen the draenei before, of course, but only at a distance. They came now and then to each
clan, ready to trade their carefully crafted tools and weapons and decorative pieces of carved stone in exchange for the thick pelts of the forest animals, brightly woven blankets, and raw materials the ores culled from land and stone. It had always been an occasion of interest in the clans, but the exchanges only lasted a few hours. The draenei-blue-skinned, soft-spoken, eerily arresting-did not invite closeness, and no clan leader had ever asked them to stay and share their hospitality. Relationships were cordial but aloof, and everyone involved seemed to want it that way.
Now the leader of the group that had arrived so unexpectedly strode over to Durotan. From his position on the earth, Durotan saw what he had never noticed when he had regarded the draenei from a distance.
Their legs did not go straight from their torsos to the earth. They curved backward, like . . . like a talbuk's, and ended in cloven hooves that were encased in metal from the shiny blue hoof upward. And ... yes, it was most definitely a thick, hairless tail that swished back and forth. Now their owner was bending over him, offering a strong blue hand. Durotan blinked, staring a moment longer at the unexpected shape of the draenei's feet and the reptilian tail, then got to his feet unaided. He looked into a face that bore strange plating on its head, like armor that had grown there. Black hair and a beard flowed over a colorful tabard, and the piercing, glowing eyes were the color of a winter lake. "You are injured?" the draenei asked in halting common Orcish, his tongue obviously having trouble wrapping itself around the guttural syllables.
"Only my pride," Durotan heard Orgrim mutter in his clan dialect. He, too, was somewhat stung. The draenei had obviously saved both their lives, and he was grateful of course. But they had seen two proud orc youths running from danger. Granted, that danger had been very real-one blow from that gigantic club would have squashed him and Orgrim into two small, crumpled piles-but still.
The draenei may or may not have heard or understood Orgrim; Durotan thought he saw the lips curve in a smile. The draenei glanced skyward, and to his dismay, Durotan realized that the sun was low on the horizon.
"You two have wandered far from home, and the sun settles to sleep," he said. "Which clan do you hail from?"
"I am Durotan. of the Frostwolf clan, and this is Orgrim of the Blackrock clan."
The draenei looked startled. "Two different clans? Were you challenging one another, that you wandered so far from your respective homes?"
Durotan and Orgrim exchanged glances. "Yes . . . and no," Durotan said. "We are friends."
The draenei's eyes widened. "Friends . . . from two different clans?"
Orgrim nodded. "Yes." He added, somewhat defensively, "It is not traditional, but it is not forbidden."
The draenei nodded, but he still looked surprised. He regarded both of them for a moment, then turned to two of his companions and murmured something in his native tongue. Durotan thought the language profoundly musical, like the sound of a stream meandering over stones, or a bird's call. The other two draenei listened intently, then nodded. One took a waterskin from his belt, drank deeply, and then began to run with a gait nearly as smooth and swift as a talbuk's, heading southwest where the Frostwolf lands were. The second raced toward the cast, to the Blackrock clan.
The draenei who had been speaking with them turned. "They will notify your families that you are well and safe. You will return home tomorrow. In the meantime, I am happy to offer you the hospitality of the draenei. My name is Restalaan. I am the leader of the guards of Telmor, the town with which both your clans regularly trade. I regret to say I do not remember cither of you, but then, the orc younglings seem a bit leery of us when We come to your territory."
Orgrim bristled. "I am afraid of no one and nothing."
Restalaan smiled a bit. "You ran from the ogre."
Orgrim's brown face darkened and his eyes glinted angrily. Durotan lowered his head slightly. As he had feared, Restalaan and the others had borne witness to their shame, and now they would be mocked.
"That," Restalaan continued calmly, as if he had not noticed the effect his words had had on the two. "is wisdom. If you had not fled, we would be sending two corpses home to your families tomorrow instead of two healthy, strong orc youths. There is no shame in fear, Orgrim and Durotan. Only in
letting fear prevent you from doing the right thing. And in your case, running was definitely the right thing."
Durotan stuck out his chin. "One day, we will be strong and our full size. Then, it will be the ogres who fear us."
Restalaan turned a mild face to him, and to Durotan's surprise, he nodded. "I completely agree," he said. "Ores are powerful hunters."
Orgrim narrowed his eyes, looking for the taunt, but there was none.
"Come," Restalaan said. "There are dangers in the Terokkar forest at night that not even the guards of Telmor would willingly face. Let us go."
Though exhausted, Durotan found the strength to keep up a steady running pace; he would not twice be shamed in one day. They ran for some time, and the sun eventually dipped below the horizon in a glorious display of crimson, gold, and finally purple. He glanced up now and then, trying not to appear rude, but curious indeed at seeing these strangers at more than several yards'
distance. He kept waiting for the signs of a city-roads made by countless feet traveling the same path, fire cairns lighting a path, the shadows of buildings against the darkening sky. He
saw nothing. And as they continued, he felt a quick stab of fear.
What if the draenei were not planning to help him and Orgrim after all? What if they were going to capture them, to hold them for ransom? What if they were going to do something worse-sacrifice them to some dark god, or-
"Here we are," Restalaan said. He dismounted and knelt on the ground, moving aside some leaves and pine needles. Orgrim and Durotan exchanged confused glances. They were still in the middle of a forest. No city, no roads, nothing at all. Both ores gathered themselves. They were severely outnumbered, but they would not die without a fight.
Still kneeling on the pine-needle carpet, Restalaan uncovered a beautiful
green crystal. It had been carefully hidden beneath the everyday detritus of the forest. Durotan stared, enraptured at the beauty of the thing. It would fit into die palm of his hand, and he ached to touch it, to feel that smoothness, that strange pulsing, against his skin. Somehow he knew it would exude a calm the likes of which he had never experienced. Restalaan uttered a string of syllables that branded themselves on Durotan's brain.
"Kehla men samir, solay 'amaa kahl."
The forest began to shimmer as if it were a reflection caught by a once-still lake into which a stone had been tossed. Despite himself, Durotan gasped. The shimmering increased, and then suddenly there was no forest, no trees, only a large, paved road that led up the side of the mountains to a place that contained images Durotan had never even conceived.
"We are in the heart of ogre country, though it was not so when die city was built so long ago," Restalaan said, rising. "If the ogres cannot see us, they cannot attack us."
Durotan found his tongue. "But. .. how?"
"A simple illusion, nothing more. A trick of . . . the light."
There was something in the way he said this that made Durotan's skin prickle. Seeing the ore's confused expression, Restalaan continued. "The eye cannot always be trusted. We think what we see is always real, that the light always reveals what is there the same way at all times. But light and shadow can be manipulated, directed, by those that understand it. In the speaking of these words and the touching of the crystal, I have altered how the light falls on the rocks, the trees, the landscape. And so your eye perceives something entirely different from what you thought was there."
Durotan knew he still stared stupidly. Restalaan chuckled slightly. "Come, my new friends. Come where none of your people have ever been before. Walk down the roads of my home."
Three
Drek'Thar had not seen the cities of the draenei when they were at peace. He only saw them when . .. well, I am getting ahead of myself. But he told me that my father had walked the shining roads of the draenei, had eaten their food, slept in their buildings, spoken with them fairly. Had caught a glimpse of a world so unlike our own that even today, it is hard to wrap one's mind around it. Even the lands of the kaldorei are not so alien to me as what I have learned of the draenei. Drek 'Thar said that Durotan did not have the words to describe what he saw; perhaps today, living in this land that bears his name and seeing what I have seen, he would. Regret is a bitter taste. ...
Durotan couldn't move. It was as if the mysterious net of shining energy had flung itself about him as it had the ogre, and he was as helpless to resist. He stared, his mouth slightly open, trying to make sense of what his eyes showed him. The draenei city was glorious! Woven into the side of the mountain as if it had sprung from it, to Durotan's eyes it was a union of stone and metal, of nature and artifice. He did not know exactly what he was seeing, but he knew it to be harmonious. With its concealing spell dissolved, the city was revealed in its tranquil magnificence. Everything he saw drew the eye upward. Massive stone steps, wide and blunt at the base and tapering toward the top, led to spherical dwellings. One reminded Durotan of a snail shell; another, of a mushroom. The combination was striking. Bathed in the hues of the setting sun, the bold lines of the steps were softened, and the domes seemed even more invitingly rounded.
He turned to see a similar expression of awe on Orgrim's face, and then saw the slight smile curving Restalaan's blue lips.
"You are welcome here, Durotan and Orgrim," Restalaan said. The words seemed to break the spell, and Durotan moved forward awkwardly. The stone of the roads had been smoothed, by time or draenei hands, he could not say. As they drew closer, Durotan could see that the city continued up the mountain. The architectural pattern of wide, bold steps leading to a softly
curved structure was repeated here. There were long roads, made of the same white stone that somehow did not seem to get dirty although at least ten generations of ores had lived and died since the draenei had arrived. Instead of the skins and horns of animals slain in the hunt, the draenei seemingly utilized the gifts of the
earth. Gleaming gems were everywhere, and there was that curious overabundance of light brown metal unlike any Durotan had ever seen. The ores knew metal; they worked it to serve them. Durotan himself had helped in the hunt with axe and sword. But this .. .
"What is your city made of?" Orgrim asked. It was the first thing he had said since the two began their odd journey in the company of the draenei.
"Many things," Restalaan said amiably. They were passing through the gates now, and receiving curious, but not hostile, looks from the denizens of this place. "We are travelers, fairly new to your world."
"New?" Durotan said. "It was over two hundred summers ago that your people came here. We were not as We are now."
"No, you are not," Restalaan agreed smoothly. "We have watched the ores grow in strength and skill and talent. You have impressed us."
Durotan knew it was meant as a compliment, but somehow the comment stung. As if ... as if the draenei thought they were somehow better than the ores. The thought came and went, fleeting as a brush from a butterfly's wings. He kept looking around, and to his shame, wondered if that was not indeed the case. No orc dwelling was this ornate, this complicated. But then . . . the ores were not draenei. They did not need, or choose, to live like the draenei.
"To answer your question, Orgrim, when We arrived here, We utilized everything We had brought with us. I know your people build boats, to travel the rivers and lakes. Well, we came on a boat that could travel in the sky ... a boat that brought us here. It was made of metal and . . . other things. Once we realized that this was to be our new home, we took part of the boat and used it in our architecture,"
So that was the giant, muted, swirling metal that seemed at once to be made of copper and skin. Durotan's breath caught.
Beside him, Orgrim scowled.
"You lie! Metal cannot float!"
An orc would have growled and boxed Orgrim's cars-hard-for such insolence. The draenei merely chuckled.
"So one would think. But one would think that it would not be possible to summon the elements to fight an ogre if one did not know better."
"That is different," sniffed Orgrim. "That is magic."
"So is this, of a sort," Restalaan said. He beckoned to one of his men and said something in his native tongue. The other draenei nodded and hurried ahead.
"There is someone I would like you to meet, if he is not too busy," Restalaan said, then fell silent. Durotan had a thousand questions but did not dare voice them, fearing that he would make himself look foolish. Orgrim seemed to have accepted Restalaan's comment about magic, but both youths still craned their necks looking around.
They passed many draenei in the street, and once
saw a female who looked about their age. She was delicately built, but tall, and when Durotan met her gaze, she seemed startled.
Then a soft smile curved her lips and she ducked her head shyly.
Durotan felt himself smiling in return. Without thinking, he said, "In our encampment you would find many children. Where are the draenei children?"
"We do not have many," Restalaan said. "Our people are very long-lived, and because of that we do not often have children."
"How long-lived?" asked Orgrim.
"Very," was all Restalaan would say. "Suffice it to say that I remember our arrival here."
Orgrim stared openly at their companion. Durotan wanted to elbow him, but he was too far away. He suddenly realized that the young-seeming female they had just seen was probably nowhere near his age after all. At that moment, the scout that Restalaan had dispatched returned and spoke quickly. Restalaan looked pleased at whatever the scout had to say, then turned, smiling, to the two ores.
"The one who brought us to this world, our prophet, Velen, is staying here for several days. I thought he might wish to see you. It is not often We get such visitors." Restalaan's smile widened. "I am very pleased to say that not only has Velen agreed to meet you, he has invited you to stay with him this evening. You are to dine with him and sleep in the magister's house. This is a very high honor indeed." Both boys were struck dumb. Dinner with the Prophet, the leader of all the draenei?
Durotan was beginning to think it might have been better if he had been squashed flat by the ogre's club.
They followed dutifully as Restalaan led them down the winding, climbing streets up through the foothills and to the large building that sat highest on the mountain. The steps, perfectly square and solid, seemed to go on forever, and Durotan's breath came quickly as they climbed. He reached the top and was regarding the snail-shell structure with interest when Restalaan said,
"Look back."
Durotan and Orgrim obeyed, and Durotan's breath caught in his throat. Below them, spread out like jewels on a meadow, was the draenei city. The last bit of sunset painted them in flaming colors, then the sun settled over the horizon and all was bathed in shades of purple and gray. Lights came on in the houses, and Durotan thought of the stars in the sky settling on the earth.
"I do not mean to brag, but I am proud of my people and our city," Restalaan said. "We have worked hard here. We love Draenor.
And I never thought to have the chance to share it with an ore. The ways of destiny are strange indeed."
As he said this, a deep, almost ancient sorrow seemed to settle on his strong blue features. He shook off the mood and smiled.
"Come in, and you will be attended to,"
Silent, shocked almost beyond the ability to speak, their young minds wide open to all the sights and sounds and smells of this thoroughly alien place, Durotan and Orgrim entered the magister's scat. They were shown into rooms that while ornate and beautiful made them feel oddly penned in. The curving walls, so attractive from the outside and no less lovely here, seemed to confine rather than embrace them. Fruits sat in bowls ready for consumption, strange clothes were set out for them to wear, and a tub of water so hot that it steamed sat in the middle of the room.
"That water is too hot to drink and is too much for steeping leaves," Durotan said.
"It is for bathing," the draenei replied.
"Bathing?"
"To wash the dirt from one's body," Restalaan said. Orgrim shot him a look, but Restalaan seemed to be quite serious.
"We do not bathe," Orgrim growled.
"We swim in the rivers in summer," Durotan said. "Perhaps this is similar."
"You do not need to do anything you feel uncomfortable with," said Restalaan. "The bath, the food, the clothes are here for your pleasure. Prophet Velen will expect to see you in an hour. I will come for you then. Is there anything you need?"
They shook their heads. Restalaan nodded and closed the door. Durotan
turned to Orgrim.
"Do you think we are in danger?" Orgrim eyed the strange materials and the hot water. "No," he said. "But... I feel like I am in a cave. I would rather be in a tent."
"Me, too." Durotan went to the wall and tentatively touched the curving surface. It felt cool and smooth beneath his fingers; he realized that he had expected it to feel warm and ... somehow alive.
Durotan turned and pointed at the water. "Do you want to try it?"
"No," Orgrim said. Both ores started laughing, and both eventually splashed their faces and found the warm water to be more pleasant than anticipated. They ate the fruit, drank the water, and decided that the cloth vests laid out for their use were acceptable to wear in place of their soiled, sweat-stiff tunics, but that they would keep their leather breeches.
The time passed more swiftly than they anticipated, and dicy were engaged in a challenge to bend one of the metal legs of a chair when there came a soft knock on the door. They jumped guiltily; Orgrim had managed to twist the chair leg somewhat and it stood a bit crookcdlv now.
"The Prophet is ready to see you now." said Restalaan.
He is an Elder, was the first thing Durotan thought as his eyes met those of Prophet Velen.
Seeing the other draenei up close had been startling enough. To behold Velen was something else again.
The Draenei Prophet was half a head taller than the tallest of the city guards Durotan had seen, but not as powerful-seeming physically. His body, clad in soft, swirling, light tan robes, seemed less muscular than theirs. And his skin! It was a warm alabaster hue. His eyes, deep set and wise, glowed a brilliant blue, and were encircled by deeply etched wrinkles, speaking of one who was not just an Elder, but possibly even ancient. His silver hair did not flow down
his back, as was the case with the others, but was ornately braided and looped, exposing his pale skull. His beard flowed like a silver wave almost to his waist.
Not Elder. Not even ancient, Durotan thought as those intense blue, glowing eyes settled upon him and seemed to bore into his very soul. Almost . . . outside of time altogether.
He thought about Restalaan's comment, diat he himself was over two hundred summers.
Velen was a good deal older than that.
"Welcome," Velen said in a mellow voice as he rose and inclined his head. The braids danced with the movement. "I am Velen. I am glad that my people found you today, though I doubt not that in a few years you would be more than capable of handling an ogre and even a gronn or two by yourselves."
Again, Durotan did not know how he knew this, but this was no idle compliment. Orgrim sensed it too, for he stood up even straightcr and met the draenei's eyes evenly. Velen waved them to sit and they did so. Durotan felt awkward and ungainly, sitting at the lavish tabic in the ornately carved chairs. When the food came out, he relaxed inwardly. Haunch of talbuk, roasted whitefcathers, large rounds of bread, and plates heaped high with vegetables-this was food he knew and understood. Somehow, he had expected something entirely different. But why? Their buildings and way of life might be vastly different from that of the orcs,but like the orcs,the draenei lived off what the land could provide. The preparation was slighdy unusual- the ores tended to cither boil dicir food or cook over an open flame, when they cooked at all; frequendy flesh was eaten raw-but overall, food was food, and this food was delicious.
Velen was an excellent host. He asked questions and seemed genuinely interested in the responses: How old would the boys be before they could hunt ogres? Choose a mate? What was their favorite thing to cat? Their favorite weapon? Orgrim. even more than Durotan, warmed to the conversation and began talking of his prowess. To his credit, he did not need
to embellish his stories.
"When my father passes, I will inherit the Doomhammcr." Orgrim said proudly. "It is an old and honorable weapon, passed down from father to eldest child."
"You will swing it well. Orgrim," said Velen. "But I trust that it will be many years before you take on the name of Doomhammer."
The fact that his father would have to die before he
would become Orgrim Doomhammer seemed to have momentarily escaped the young ore. and he abruptly grew solemn. Velen
smiled, with. Durotan thought, a hint of sorrow. At the movement, fine cracks appeared in Velen's face, the subtlest of spidcrwebs on that smooth white surface.
"But describe this hammer to me. It must be a mighty weapon."
Orgrim brightened again. "It is enormous! The stone is black and blunt and powerful, and the shaft is made of carefully crafted wood. Over the years, the shaft has had to be replaced, but the stone itself has not a chip on it. It is called the Doomhammer because when its owner takes it into battle, it spells doom for the enemy."
"I sec," said Velen, still smiling.
Orgrim was warming to his task. "But there is also another prophecy," he continued. "It is said that the last of the Doomhammer line will use it to bring first salvation and then doom to the orc people. Then it will pass into the hands of one who is not of the Blackrock clan, all will change again, and it will once again be used in the cause of justice."
"That is a powerful prophecy," said Velen. He said no more, but Durotan felt a shiver. This man was dubbed "Prophet" by his people. Did he know if the Doomhammer prophecy would come true? Did Durotan dare to ask?
Orgrim continued, describing the Doomhammer in loving detail. Durotan, who had seen the weapon in question, ceased listening to Orgrim's chatter and focused on Velen, Why was this being so interested in them?
Durotan was a sensitive youth, he knew. He had overheard some snippets of conversation from his parents, who were worried about such sensitivity, and from Mother Kashur. who scoffed at them and told them to worry about important things and to "leave the boy to his fate." Durotan knew fcigncd interest when he saw it. and felt that he'd recognize it even in a draenei. But Velen's brilliant blue eyes were bright and focused, his kind if ugly face open, his questions sincere. He wanted to hear about the ores.
And the more he heard, the sadder he seemed to become.
/ wish Mother Kashur could be here instead of me, Durotan thought suddenly. She would appreciate this opportunity more than Orgrim or I could.
When Orgrim had finished describing the Doomhammer. Durotan asked, "Can you tell us of your people. Prophet? We know so litdc. In the last few hours I have learned more than any of my people have over the last hundred years, I think."
Velen turned glowing blue eyes to Durotan. Durotan wanted to quail from that gaze, not because he was afraid of it. but because he had never before felt so...seen.
"The draenei have never withheld information, young Durotan. But... I believe you may be the first who has ever asked. What do you wish to know?"
Everything, Durotan wanted to stay, but instead focused his question. "The ores had never met the draenei until two hundred summers past. Restalaan said you came here in a great vessel that can travel the skies. Tell me more of this."
Velen took a sip of the beverage that tasted like summer to Durotan and
smiled. "To begin with, 'draenei' is not our true name. It is a term that means ... 'exiled ones.
Durotan gaped.
"We disagreed with others in our world. We chose not to sell our people into slavery, and for that we were exiled. We have spent much time finding a suitable place to dwell-a place to call our own. We fell in love with this land, and We call it Dracnor."
Durotan nodded. He had heard the term before. He liked how it sat on his tongue when he spoke it, and the ores did not have a name for this place other than "world."
"It is our term, We have not the arrogance to think the ores would use it as well. But such We have dubbed it, and We love Dracnor deeply. It is a beautiful world, and We have seen many,"
Orgrim gasped. "You have seen other worlds?"
"Indeed We have. And We have met many people."
"People like the ores?"
Velen smiled gently. "There is no one like the ores," he said, respect resonant in his voice. "You are unique in our travels."
Durotan and Orgrim looked at each other and sat up a little straightcr in their chairs.
"But yes, we had been traveling for some time before we found this land. Here we are. and here we will stay."
Durotan burned to ask more-to ask how long they had been traveling, what their homeland had been like, why they had left it.
But there was something in Velen's timeless face that told him that although he had been invited to inquire, the draenei leader would not tell him that
particular talc.
So instead he asked about how they had tamed the nature of their weapons and magic. "Our magic comes from the earth." Durotan said. "From the shaman and the ancestors."
"Our magic comes from a different source." Velen said. "I do not think you will understand it if I explained it.
Orgrim said indignantly, "We are not stupid!"
"Forgive me, I did not mean to imply that," Velen said at once. It was a graceful and sincere apology, and again Durotan was impressed. "Your people are wise and you two are obviously bright. But... I am not sure I have the words in your language. I have no doubt that if I had the time and vocabulary you would understand."
Even in the explanation he seemed to grope for the words. Durotan thought of the sort of magic that could disguise a city, thought of the soft, uncanny metal somehow melded with gems of the earth and
solid stone, and realized that Velen was right. There did not breathe an orc who could have grasped all of this in a single evening, though he suspected Mother Kashur would have an intrinsic comprehension, and he again wondered why it was that the two races did not interact more.
The conversation turned to more mundane topics. The two youths learned that deep in the Terokkar forest was a spot, sacred to the draenei, called Auchindoun. Here, the dead were laid to rest, placed in the ground instead of being burned on pyres. Privately, Durotan thought this odd, but held his tongue. Telmor was the closest town to this "city of the dead," and Velen had come on a sad mission, to lay to rest some who had died fighting the same ogre that had almost claimed Orgrim and Durotan earlier that day.
Normally. Velen explained, he lived in a beautiful place called the Temple of Karabor. There were other draenei towns, but the largest was to the north, a place called Shattrath.
At last, the meal was over. Velen sighed, and his eyes rested on his empty plate, but Durotan felt certain the Prophet did not see it.
"You will excuse me." Velen said, rising. "It has been a long day, and I must meditate before I sleep. It has been an honor to meet you, Durotan of the Frostwolf clan, and Orgrim. of the Blackrock clan. I trust you will sleep well and deeply, safe within these walls, where none of your people has been before." Durotan and Orgrim rose with the others and bowed. Velen smiled with, Durotan thought, a hint of that strange sorrow he had glimpsed in the draenei leader earlier.
"We will meet again, young ones. Good night." The two ores left shortly afterwards. They were escorted to their rooms and indeed slept well, though Durotan had a dream of an old orc sitting quietly by his side, and wondered what it meant.
"Bring him," the old orc said to Mother Kashur.
Mother Kashur, the eldest shaman of the Frostwolf clan, slept deeply. Because of her high position of honor, her tent was second in lavishncss only to that of Garad, the clan leader. Thick rugs of clefthoof fur kept her old bones from the cold of the earth, and a loyal and loving granddaughter tended to her needs, cooking and cleaning and keeping the fire stoked on cold days for the clan's
"mother." Mother Kashur's duty was to listen to the wind and water and fire and grass, and drink the bitter herbal beverage each night that opened her mind to visits from the ancestors. She gathered information for her clan the way the others gathered fruits and firewood, and this gift nourished them as deeply.
The old orc was not present, and yet she knew he was real. He was in her dream, and that was enough for her. In this dream state, she was young and vibrant, could see her ruddy skin glowing with health, knew
her form to be sleek and knotted with muscle. The old orc was the age at which he had died, the age at which his wisdom had been at its height. His
name had been Tal'kraa in life, but now, although he was many generations distant from her, she called him only Grandfather.
"You received the message," Grandfather told the young, vibrant dreamKashur. She nodded, her dark hair flowing with the movement.
"He and the Blackrock boy are with the draenei," she said. "They will be safe. I can feel it."
Grandfather Tal'kraa nodded, his thick jowls shaking with the movement. His tusks were yellowed with age and one had been broken off in a battle long since forgotten.
"Yes, they are safe. Bring him."
It was the second time he had said this, and Kashur was not certain as to what he meant.
"He will come to the mountain in a few months, when the trees shed their leaves to sleep," she said. "So yes, I will bring him."
Tal'kraa shook his head fiercely, his brown eyes narrowed in annoyance, Kashur smothered a smile; of all the spirits that honored her with their presence. Grandfather Tal'kraa was one of the least patient.
"No, no," Tal'kraa growled. "Bring him to us. Bring him to the caverns of Oshu'gun. I would look upon him there."
Kashur inhaled swiftly. "You ... wish me to take him to meet the ancestors?" "is that not what I just said? Foolish girl! What has happened to the shaman these days?"
It was a rant he went on frequently and it troubled Kashur not in the slightest. She was too stunned by the import of what he had just said. Sometimes the ancestors had wanted to see a child before; it was infrequent, but it had occurred. Usually it meant that the child in question was destined for the shamanic path. She had not thought Durotan's feet would walk that road; it
was rare that a shaman led a clan. There would be too much pulling him in each direction for him to be an effective leader. To both listen to and honor the spirits and to guide one's people well were more than most ores could manage. One who could do both would be a remarkable orc indeed.
When Kashur did not reply. Grandfather growled and slammed his staff on the ground. Kashur jumped slightly.
"I will bring him on his initiation day," Kashur assured her ancestor.
"At last, you understand," Tal'kraa said, shaking his staff at her. 'And if you fail me, I will take my staff to your head instead of the innocent earth."
He could not completely hide a smile as he said it, and Kashur smiled back as her dream-self closed her eyes. For all his bluster and short temper, Tal'kraa was wise and kind and loved her deeply. She wished she had known him when he was alive, but he had died almost a hundred years ago.
Kashur's eyelids fluttered open, and she sighed as her spirit returned to her current, real body ... as old as Tal'kraa had been when he died, hands and feet curled up with joint pain, body weak, hair stark white. She knew in her heart that the time would soon come when she would be able to leave this body, this shell, for the final time and be with the ancestors in the sacred mountain.
Drek'Thar, her apprentice, would then be the advisor to Garad and the rest of the Frostwolf clan. She had every confidence in him, and actually looked forward to the day when she would be pure spiritual energy.
Although, she mused as the sunlight trickled in and the birdsong caressed her cars, she would miss the things that being alive granted her, the simple things like birdsong and hot food and the loving touch of her granddaughter.
Bring him, Grandfather had said.
And so she would.
Four
Last night, with the moon full overhead and the stars gleaming as if in approval, a young male was initiated into adulthood. It was the first time I have had the chance to be part of this ritual, the Om'riggor. In my earlier years, I was cut off from the rites and traditions of my people; and truth be told, all ores had been cut off from such rites for too long. And once I had set my feet on my destiny's path, I had become embroiled in battle. War consumed me. Ironically, the need to protect my people from the Burning Legion and to give them a place where our traditions could again flourish took me far away from these things.
But now, Durotar and Orgrimmar are established. Now, there is a peace, tenuous though it might be. Now there are shaman reclaiming the ancient ways, young males and females coming of age who, if the spirits will it, may never know the ashy taste of war.
Last night, I participated in a timeless ritual that had been denied an entire generation.
Last night, my heart was filled with joy and the sense of connection for which I had always longed.
Durotan's heart hammered in his chest as he stared at the talbuk. It was a mighty beast, worthy prey, its horns not for mere decoration but sharp and dangerous. Durotan had seen at least one warrior gored to death, impaled upon the twelve prongs as surely as if upon a spear.
And he was to take it down with only a single weapon and no armor.
There had been the whispers, of course. Any mature talbuk will do to satisfy the needs of the ritual, he had heard someone murmur in his car as he sat blindfolded in the waiting tent. They are all fierce fighters, but at this season, the males have shed their horns.
Other whispers: You may only carry one weapon, Durotan, son of Garad; but you could hide armor in the wilderness where no one would know.
And, most shameful of all: Theshaman will determine if you are successful by tasting the blood upon your face; the blood from a long-dead talbuk tastes exactly like that of one freshly slain. He ignored all the temptations. Perhaps there had been other ores who had succumbed to them, but he would not be among them.
Durotan would seek out a female, who was quite well equipped with horns at this time of year; he would take the one weapon he was permitted, and it would be the blood of the beast hekilled, steaming in the cold air, that would anoint his checks.
And now. standing in the early, unexpected fall of snow, his axe growing ever heavier in his hand, Durotan shivered. But he never faltered.
He had been tracking the talbuk herd for two days now, surviving only on what he could gather, creating meager fires in the twilight that bathed the snow in a rich lavender hue and sleeping in what shelter he stumbled upon. Orgrim had already completed his rite of passage. Durotan envied the fact that his friend had been born in summer. He had thought it would still not be too difficult in early autumn, but winter had decided to come ahead of time and the weather was bitter.
It seemed as if the talbuk herd, too, was taunting him. He could come upon their tracks and droppings easily enough, see where they had scraped the snow for dried grass or pulled bark from the trees. But they always seemed to elude him. It was late afternoon on the third day when it appeared as though the ancestors had decided to reward his determination. Twilight was coming, and Durotan had thought with a sinking heart that he would have to again seek shelter to mark the end of a fruidess day.
Then he realized that the small pellets of dung were not frozen hard, but fresh.
They were close.
He began to run, the snow squeaking beneath his fur boots, a new warmth filling him. He followed the tracks as he had been taught, cleared a rise-
And beheld a herd of the glorious creatures.
Immediately he crouched behind a large boulder and peered around to gaze at the beasts. They were still dark brown against the white snow, their winter coats not yet upon them. There were at least two dozen, maybe more, mostly females. It was good that he had found the herd, but now he had another problem. How would he take down just one? Talbuk. unlike many prey animals, would protect others in their herd. If he attacked one. the rest would come to defend it.
Shaman accompanied the hunters in order to distract the animals. Durotan was alone, and suddenly he felt very vulnerable.
He frowned and rallied himself. He had been searching for these creatures for almost three days, and now here they were.
Nightfall would see a fresh haunch of meat devoured by a hungry orc youth, or it would see a stiffening orc corpse in the snow.
He watched them for a while, aware that the shadows were lengthening, but not wanting to hurry and make a fatal mistake. The talbuk were diurnal creatures, and they were busy digging hollows in the snow in which to curl up. He knew they did such a thing, but now he watched in dismay as they settled in tightly against one another. How would he separate one?
Movement caught his eye. One of the females, young and healthy from a gentle summer spent feasting on sweet grass and berries, seemed to be in a feisty mood. She stamped and tossed her head-crowned with a glorious set of horns-and almost danced
around the others. She did not seem inclined to join them, but like one or two others, opted to sleep on the outside of the cluster of furry bodies.
Durotan began to grin. What an offering from the spirits! It was a good omen. The liveliest, healthiest doc in the herd, the one who did not need to follow mindlessly, but chose her own path. While that choice would likely be her death, it would also give Durotan a chance to win his honor and right to be treated as an adult. The spirits understood the balance of such things. At least, he was told they did.
Durotan waited. Twilight came and went, and the sun sank below the mountains. With the sun went even the feeble warmth it had hitherto provided. Durotan waited with the patience of the predator. Finally, even the edgiest of the herd tucked up its long legs and bedded down with its fellows.
At last, Durotan moved. His limbs were stiff and he almost stumbled. He crept slowly from his hiding place behind the boulder and went down the slope, his eyes on the drowsing female. Her head drooped on its long neck, and her breathing was regular. He could see small white puffs appearing in front of her muzzle.
Slowly, placing his feet as carefully as he could, he moved toward his quarry. He did not feel the cold; the heat of anticipation, the powerful focus, drove any sensations of discomfort away. Closer still he came, and still the talbukdoc dreamed.
He lifted his axe. He swung it down.
Her eyes opened. She tried to scramble to her feet, but the death blow had already come. Durotan wanted to scream the battle cry he had heard his father utter so many times, but he bit it back. It would not do to slay the talbuk only to be slain himself by a dozen of her herd in retaliation. He had sharpened the blade to shocking keenness, and it sliced through the thick neck and vertebrae as if slicing through cheese. Blood spurted, the warm sticky fluid spattering Durotan gently, and he smiled fiercely. Anointing himself with the blood of his first solo kill was part of the ritual; the talbuk doc had done it for him. Another good omen.
Silent though he had tried to be, he heard the sounds of the awakening herd. He whirled, breathing heavily, and let loose with the blood-chilling battle cry his throat had been aching to utter. He held his axe, the gleam of its metal blade now obscured with crimson blood, and bellowed again.
The talbuk hesitated. He had been told that if it was a clean kill, they would flee rather than attack, intuiting on some primal level that they could no longer help their fallen sister. He hoped this was true; he might be able to take down one or two, but would fall beneath their padded feet if they chose to attack.
Moving as one, they began to back away, and then finally whirled and turned to run. He watched them gallop over the rise to disappear, their pawprints in the pristine snow the only evidence that they had been here.
Durotan lowered his axe, panting with exertion. He raised it again and let out a cry of triumph. His empty belly would be full tonight; the spirit of the talbuk would enter his dreams. And on the morrow he would return to his people an adult male, ready to take his place in serving the clan.
Ready to one day become its leader.
"Why do we not ride?" Durotan asked petulantly, glowering like a child.
"Because that is not the way it is done," Mother Kashur said curtly. Irritated, she cufFcd the boy. Durotan was young and fit; the lengthy hike to the sacred mountain of the ancestors was as nothing to him. She, on the other hand, would have deeply appreciated being able to ride atop her great black wolf Drcamwalkcr. But the traditions were ancient and specific, and as long as she was able to walk, walk she would. Durotan bowed his head in acknowledgement as Theycontinued on.
Despite the fact that each trip exhausted her more than the previous one, Mother Kashur felt a sense of excitement that helped temper the pain and weariness. She had taken many a youngling-both male and female, for each was as valued as the other-on this final part of their rite of adulthood. But never before had she been asked to bring one before the ancestors. She was
not too old to be curious.
It was less than a few hours for the young, about a day for the older bones to make the trip. Evening was coming and they were almost there. Mother Kashur looked up at the familiar shape of the mountain and smiled. Unlike other mountain ranges, whose angles seemed to be random. Oshu'gun's spire was a perfect triangle. Gleaming like crystal, its facets catching the sun. it resembled the surrounding terrain not at all. It had come from the heavens, long ago, and the spirits had been drawn to it. It was for this reason the ores had settled here, in its sacred shadow. Whatever squabbles and petty differences they had as living beings, they were as one here, inside this mountain. She would go there again soon, she knew, but not as a hobbling, elderly woman. This was her last visit in such a broken vessel. The next time Kashur approached Oshu'gun, she would come as a spirit, floating in the air as the birds did, her heart light and clean and made new.
"What's wrong, Mother?" Durotan asked, concern in his young voice. She blinked, coming out of her reverie, and smiled at him.
"Not a thing," she assured him truthfully.
The shadows had chased away the sunlight by the time they reached the foot of the mountain. They would sleep here tonight and begin their ascent at dawn. Durotan fell asleep first, wrapped in the hide of the talbuk doc he himself had slain not too long ago, and Mother Kashur watched him fondly as he slept the deep sleep of the innocent. She herself would have no dreams; her mind needed to be clear if she was to be ready to receive visions on the morrow.
The climb was a long, tiring one, harder by far than the simple hike to reach the mountain, and Kashur was grateful both for her sturdy staff and Durotan's strong hand. But today, Kashur's feet seemed to move more surely her lungs work more efficiently as she and her young charge climbed. She felt as if the ancestors were pulling her forward, aiding her physical body with the power of their spirit ones.
They paused at the entrance of the sacred cave. It was a perfect oval in the
smooth surface of the mountain, and as always, Kashur felt as though she were entering the womb of the earth. Durotan tried to look brave, but succeeded only in looking slighdy nervous. Mother Kashur did not smile at him. He should be nervous. He was about to enter sacred space at the specific request of one of his long-dead ancestors. Even she was not unmoved.
She lit a bundle of dried grasses that gave off a sweet, pungent scent, and waved the smoke over him to purify him. Then she marked him with the blood his own father had shed for this moment, kept carefully in a small stoppered leather bag. Kashur placed her withered hand upon his smooth, low brow, murmured her blessing, and then nodded.
"You well know that few are called before the ancestors who do not walk the path of the shaman," she said
gravely. Brown eyes wide, Durotan nodded. "I do not know what will happen. Maybe nothing. But if something occurs, you know to behave with honor and respect to the beloved dead."
Durotan swallowed and nodded again. Then he took a deep breath and stood straight and tall, and in the yet-unmolded body of the boy, Kashur saw a hint of the clan chieftain to come.
Together, they went inside, Mother Kashur going first to light the torches that lined the walls. The orange illumination showed them the downward twining path, worn smooth by years of bare or booted orc feet. Here and there steps had been carved, to make those pilgrim's feet more secure. It was always cool inside this tunnel, warmer than it was outside in winter. Kashur let her hand brush the sides of the wall, remembering the first time she had come here long ago, the blood of her mother wet on her own face, her eyes wide, her heart racing.
Finally, the long, gentle downward slope cased. There were no more torches on the wall to light, and Durotan looked at her, puzzled.
"We will not need to bring fire to come before the ancestors," Kashur said. They continued on a level surface, traveling into darkness. Durotan was not
frightened, but he did look confused as they left the comfort of fire behind.
Now it was completely dark. Kashur reached out a hand and grasped Durotan's to guide him. His strong. stubby fingers folded gently around hers. Even now, when he might be expected to clutch my hand, he remembers how it aches, she thought. The next Frostwolf chieftain would have a considerate heart.
They continued without speaking. And then ... subtly, like the arrival of dawn after a long, dark night, light began to grow around them. Now Kashur could dimly see the shape of the youth who stood beside her, so much younger than she and yet already walking in the body of a grown male. She watched him as they moved forward; the miracle of the cave of the ancestors was familiar to her, but Durotan's reaction was not.
His eyes widened and he inhaled swiftly as he looked around. The glow emanated from a pool in the center of the cavern, casting a soft white light over everything. All was smooth and soft and dimly radiant; there were no sharp angles or rough places, and Kashur felt the familiar sensation of deep peace wash over her. She let Durotan look his fill in silence. The cavern was huge, larger than the main drumming and dancing area at the Kosh'harg festival, and branching tunnels led to places that Kashur had never dared explore. It would have to be so large, would it not, to be able to host the spirit of every orc who had lived and died?
She walked to the water and he followed her, watching her closely. She removed the pack she carried and gestured that he do likewise. Carefully, Kashur removed several watcrskins, opened them, and with a soft prayer added their water to the glowing liquid.
"You asked about the watcrskins as we departed," she said quietly to Durotan, "The water in here is not native to this place. Long ago, we began offering blessed water to the spirits. Every time we come, we contribute to the sacred pool. And even so, I know not how, the water docs not dissipate as it would in an ordinary hollow. Such is the power of the Mountain of Spirits."
Once she had emptied the watcrskins, she sat down with a soft grunt and
peered into the luminous depths. Durotan emulated her.
She knew the angle at which she could see her reflection and made sure they were both positioned correctly. At first, all she could see was her own face and that of Durotan. Their features looked spectral themselves, reflected in a white pool rather than a dark one.
Then a third figure joined them, as if Grandfather Tal'kraa were standing right beside her shoulder, his reflection as clear as theirs.
Their eyes met, and Kashur smiled.
She craned her neck to look up at him, but Durotan continued to gaze into the water as if searching for the answers there. Kashur's heart sank a little, but immediately she reprimanded herself. If Durotan was not of the shamanic path, then he was not of the shamanic path. Surely his destiny would be an honorable one regardless, born to lead his clan as he had been.
"My many times great granddaughter," Tal'kraa said with more gentleness than Kashur had ever heard from him before. "You have brought him, as I asked." Leaning heavily on a staff as insubstantial as he, the spirit of the Grandfather moved in a slow circle around Durotan as the young orc continued to look into the water. Kashur watched both Frostwolf males closely. Durotan shivered and looked about, no doubt wondering where the sudden chill came from. Kashur smiled to herself. He could not see his ancestor's spirit, but he knew, somehow, that Tal'kraa was there.
"You cannot see him," she said a bit sadly,
Durotan's head came up and his nostrils flared. Swiftly, he got to his feet. In the eerie light, his tusks looked blue and his skin had a green cast to it.
"No, Mother. I cannot. But ... is an ancestor present?"
"Indeed he is," Kashur said. She turned her attention to the ghost. "I did bring him here, as you requested. How do you find him?"
Durotan swallowed hard, but remained standing straight and tall as the spirit circled him thoughtfully.
"I sensed . . . something," Tal'kraa said. "I had thought he would be a shaman, but if he cannot see me now, then he never will. But although he will not see spirits or summon the elements, he is born to a great destiny. He will be an important asset to the Frostwolf clan ... indeed, to all his people."
"He will be ... a hero?" Kashur asked, her breath catching. All ores strove to uphold a code of courage and honor, but only a few were powerful enough to have their names engraved upon the memory of their
descendants. At her words Durotan inhaled swiftly, and she could see the wanting on his face.
"I cannot tell," said Tal'kraa, frowning a little. "Teach him well, Kashur, for one thing is certain: From his line will come salvation."
In a gesture of tenderness the likes of which Kashur had never seen, Tal'kraa reached out and brushed an insubstantial finger across Durotan's check, Durotan's eyes went wide and Kashur could see he had to fight the natural instinct to draw back, but Durotan did not quail beneath the spectral caress.
Then, like mist on a hot day, Tal'kraa was gone. Kashur stumbled a little; she always forgot how the energy of the spirits fed her.
Durotan stepped forward quickly to catch her arm, and she was grateful for his youthful strength.
"Mother, are you all right?" he asked. She gripped his arm and nodded. His first concern was for her, not for what the ancestor might or might not have said about him. Even as she pondered the words, she decided not to tell Durotan of them. Level-headed and great-hearted though he was, such a prophecy could corrupt even the truest of orcish hearts.
From his line will come salvation.
"I am all right," she reassured him, "But these bones are no longer young, and the energy of the spirits is powerful,"
"I wish I could have seen him," Durotan said a bit wistfully. "But. .. but I know I felt him." "You did, and that is more than most are honored with." Kashur said.
"Mother . . . can you tell me what he said? About- about me being a hero?"
He was trying to act calm and mature, but a note of pleading crept in. She did not blame him. All wanted to live on in glorious memory, through tales told of their adventures. He would not be an orc if he did not share that desire.
"Grandfather Tal'kraa said it was uncertain," she said bluntly. He nodded and hid his disappointment well. That much was all she had planned to say, but something moved her to add, "You have a destiny to fulfill, Durotan, son of Garad. Be not a fool in battle and die before you can fulfill it."
He chuckled then. "A fool docs not serve his clan well, and that is what I wish to do."
"Then, future chieftain," said Kashur, chuckling also, "you had best be about finding a mate."
And she laughed out loud as, for the first time on their journey together, Durotan looked completely unnerved.
Five
Upon reflection, so Drek'Tliar tells me, this time in our history was as a perfect day in early summer. We ores had everything we truly needed: a hospitable world, the ancestors to guide us, the elements to aid us as they saw fit. Food was plentiful, our enemies were fierce but not invincible, and we were rich with blessings. If the draenei were not necessarily our allies, neither were they foe. They shared their knowledge and their bounty whenever they were asked; it was we, the orcs,who always held back. And it is we, the orcs,who would unwittingly be twisted to serve another's end.
Hate is powerful. Hate can be eternal. Hate can be manipulated.
And hate can be created.
In the darkness visible, ageless, timeless, Kil'jaeden dwelt. The power surged and throbbed through him, better than blood now, more nourishing than meat or drink, heady and calming at the same time. He was not omnipotent, not yet, or else worlds would fall before him with a thought rather than through battle and destruction, and on the whole, he was content with this.
But they yet lived, die exiles. Kil'jaeden could sense them, though centuries had passed according to those to whom time still mattered. They were lying low, Velen and die rest of the fools. Too cowardly to face him and Archimonde, who had worked as his friend and ally through the . . . changes ... as he had when they were simple beings.
He, Archimonde, and the others no longer thought of themselves as "credar." Velen would call them "man'ari," but they called themselves the Burning Legion. Sargeras's army. The chosen ones.
He extended a scarlet hand, long and elegant and clawed, into the nothingness that was everything and felt it ripple beneath his inquiry. Scouts had been dispatched the moment the enemy had escaped, scouts who reported
nothing but failure. Archimonde wanted them to die for their lack of success, but Kil'jaeden opted otherwise. Those who feared, fled, he had good cause to know.
Those who sniffed reward and their lord's approval stayed, hungering for it. So while Kil'jaeden made his disapproval known, those who had failed him usually got a second chance. Or third, if he believed them to be doing all they could and not simply coasting on his goodwill.
Archimonde disagreed on this obsession that occupied Kil'jaeden.
"There are worlds aplenty to conquer and devour, in service to our master Sargeras," Archimonde rumbled. The blackness glowed around them as his voice pierced it. "Let the fool go. We would sense it if he used his talents on any level that would pose a threat.
Let him rot on some world, bereft of everything that mattered to him."
Kil'jaeden slowly turned his massive head to regard the other demon lord.
"It is not about rendering him powerless," Kil'jaeden hissed. "It is about destroying him and those foolish enough to have followed him. It is about crushing him for his lack of faith. For his stubbornness. For his refusal to think about what was best for all of us."
The large, clawed hand turned into a fist and the sharp nails dug into the palm. Molten fire poured forth, then the flow stopped as it hit what passed for air, leaving a thick ridge like a scar. Kil'jaeden's body was covered with many such welts; he took pride in them.
Archimonde was powerful, elegant, smooth, intelligent. But he lacked the burning desire for utter obliteration that Kil'jaeden nursed. He had explained it time and again, and now simply sighed and opted not to discuss the matter further. For centuries now, they had had this argument; no doubt they would continue to have it for centuries more ... or until Kil'jaeden succeeded in the destruction of the being who had once been his closest friend. Perhaps that was it. Kil'jaeden mused with a sudden enlightenment.
Archimonde had never had particular feelings for Velen other than as a fellow leader of the eredar. Kil'jaeden had loved Velen as a brother, closer than that, loved him almost as another aspect of himself
And then . ..
Again the huge hand clenched, and again unholy fire poured forth in lieu of blood.
No.
It would not be enough to think of Velen sitting on some backwater world, nursing his hurt pride, living off the land in some cave.
Kil'jaeden once would have said he wanted blood. But blood, powerful in its own way as it was, would not satisfy him now. He wanted the essence of shame, of utter and complete humiliation. That would be even sweeter than the copperytaste of life flowing from Velen and his stupid followers.
Archimonde tilted his head, a gesture Kil'jaeden recognized. One of his own servants was speaking to him. Archimonde had his own schemes and machinations, all, like Kil'jaeden's, in service to their dark master and his ultimate conquest. Without a word Archimonde rose to his full, imposing height and departed, his movements lithe and sleek, belying his size.
At that moment as well, Kil'jaeden felt a slight scratching inside his head. He recognized it as once: it was Talgath, ever his right hand, seeking contact. And the sensation emanating from the thought was one of cautious hope.
What is it, my friend? Speak! Kil'jaeden commanded in his mind.
My great lord, I do not wish to plant false hope, but. .. I may have found them.
Tempered delight rose inside Kil'jaeden. Like the being he hunted, Talgath was ever the cautious one of his minions. Only a little lower in rank than Kil'jaeden himself, he had proved his loyalty over the centuries. He would
not say even this guarded statement without good cause.
Where? And what makes you sense this?
There is a small world, primitive and insignificant. And I have sensed their peculiar brand of magic Minting the area. It is possible that they may have come and gone. Such, alas, has happened before.
Kil'jaeden nodded, even though Talgath was not present to see the gesture. Some things from his past yet lingered, he thought, smiling a litdc at the ancient movement that betokened agreement in nearly every sentient species he had encountered.
You speak truly, he acknowledged. Many times before, Kil'jaeden's forces had arrived on some world or other, lured by the sweet essence of eredar magic, only to find that somehow Velen and his wretched followers had gotten wind of the approach and escaped. But I remain hopeful. I will find them and twist them to my purposes, and I have eternity in wnicJi to do so.
A thought occurred to him. So often before, Kil'jaeden's forces had descended upon a world where Velen was thought to be. only to have him escape. Kil'jaeden had nursed his insulted pride by destroying such worlds, but the slaughter of primitive races-
though pleasant-did not slake his demonic thirst for complete and total revenge.
He would not behave that way this time. He would not send Talgath at the head of the Burning Legion. Velen had once been the strongest of them, the wisest, the most attuned to magic and science. Kil'jaeden could not imagine that his old friend would have dropped his guard, not after such a relatively brief time. Velen would be constantly on the alert, ready to flee in the face of so obvious a threat.
But... what about a less obvious threat?
Talgath . . . I want you to investigate this world for me.
My lord? Talgath's mental voice was smooth and poised, but puzzled.
We have descended upon worlds in force before, and to no avail. Perhaps this time, only one is sent. One only, but one who can be trusted completely.
Kil'jaeden sensed unease and pride warring in Talgath's thoughts.
There are more ways to destroy one's enemy than with an army. Sometimes, those ways are better.
You- you wish me to find such a better way, then?
Precisely Visit this place on your own. Learnaboutit. Investigate. Tell me if the exiles are truly there, and if so, what their state is.
Tell me what they live on, if they are fat and settled like tamed livestock or lean and edgy, like prey ani
mals. Tell me what their world is like, what other peoples live there, what creatures, what seasons. Investigate, Talgath. Do nothing without express orders from me.
Of course, my lord. I shall prepare at once. Still puzzled, but obedient and intelligent. Talgath had served the man'ari master well in the past. Now he would serve well again.
Kil'jaeden's face, though it little resembled what it had been before he had cast his lot with the great lord Sargeras. was still able to twist into the facsimile of a smile.
Durotan, like all his people, had been ready to begin training with weapons at the age of six. His body was already tall and filling out, and the usage of weaponry came naturally to his people. At twelve, he had gone with the hunting parties. And now, after the rite that marked him as an adult, he had been able to join in the hunt for the ogres and their obscene, twisted masters, the gronn.
This year, as the autumn Kosh'harg came, he joined the adults in the circle after the children had been sent to bed. And as he and Orgrim had learned years before, being an adult and being able to attend the fireside circle was not very interesting.
However, the one thing he did find interesting, as he watched with observant brown eyes, was interacting with those whose names he had known for many years, but who never spoke much to him because of his youth. Mother Kashur, of course, was from his own dan. He knew she had high standing among the shaman of the other clans, and he took pride in that fact. He noticed her huddled by the fire on this first night, a woven blanket wrapped around a frame that seemed to him little more than bone and skin.
He knew, without knowing how he knew, that this would be her last Kosh'harg celebration, and the thought saddened him more than he had expected.
Next to her. younger than she but older still than Durotan's parents, was Kashur's apprentice Drek'Thar. Durotan had not spoken much with Drek'Thar, but the older ore's sharp tongue and sharp eyes were deserving of much respect. Durotan's brown eyes continued to roam over the assembled company. Tomorrow, the shaman would be gone, departing for their meetings with the ancestors in the cavern of the sacred mountain. Durotan shivered as he again recalled his visit there, and the cold breeze that felt like a draft, but was nothing so ordinary.
Over there was Grom Hcllscrcam. the young and slightly manic chieftain of the Warsong clan. Only a few years older than Durotan and Orgrim, he was new to his position. There had been muttcrings about the mysterious circumstances under which the former chieftain had died, but the Warsong clan did not challenge Grom's leadership. Durotan thought it no wonder. Though youthful, Grom was intimidating. The dancing, flickering light of the fire only served to make
him look more menacing. Thick black hair flowed down his back. Upon his ascension to chieftainship, Grom's jaw had been tattooed a uniform shade of
black. Around his neck hung a necklace of bones. Durotan knew their meaning: Among the Warsong, it was tradition that a young warrior wear the bones of his first kill, inscribed with his personal runes.
Beside Grom was the enormous, imposing Blackhand of the Blackrock clan. Next to Blackhand, munching in silence, was the chieftain of the Shattered Hand clan, Kargath Bladcfist. In lieu of a hand, he had a scythe embedded in his wrist, and even now as an adult Durotan found himself unsettled as the blade glinted in the firelight. Next to him was Kilrogg Dcadcyc, chieftain of the Bleeding Hollow clan. The name was not a familial one. but one he had taken for himself. One eye flitted over the assembled company; the other sat, mangled and dead in truth, in its socket. If Grom was young for a chieftain, then Kilrogg was old for one.
but it was clear to Durotan that despite his years and grizzled appearance, Kilrogg was far from done with cither life or leadership.
Uneasily Durotan turned his attention elsewhere.
On Drek'Thar's left was the famous Ner'zhul of the Shadowmoon clan. For as long as Durotan could remember, Ner'zhul had led the shaman. Once. Durotan had been permitted to attend a hunt at which Ner'zhul had been present, and the mastery this shaman had over his skills was shocking. While others grunted and labored to contact the elements, directing them powerfully but without grace, Ner'zhul remained tranquil. The earth shook beneath him when he asked it; lightning came from the skies to strike where he directed. Fire, air, water, earth, and the elusive Spirit of the Wilds all called him companion and friend. He had not seen Ner'zhul interact with the ancestors, of course; no one but shaman were witness to such things. But it was clear to Durotan that if the ancestors had not favored Ner'zhul, he would not have serenely carried power all this time.
Ner'zhul's apprentice, however, Durotan did not like. Orgrim was sitting next to his boyhood friend, and, seeing where Durotan's gaze led, leaned over and whispered, "I think that Gul'dan would better serve his people if he were set out as bait."
Durotan looked away so that no one else would see him smile. He did not know how experienced Gul'dan was as a shaman; surely he must have some ability or else Ner'zhul would not have taken him on to succeed him. But he was not a very prepossessing ore.
Shorter than many, softer than most, with a shoit, bushy beard, he did not exemplify the orc as a warrior. But Durotan supposed that one did not have to be a hero to contribute.
"Now that one, she is a warrior born."
Durotan looked in the direction that Orgrim had indicated and his eyes widened slightly. Orgrim had spoken the truth. Standing tall and straight, her muscles rippling beneath smooth brown skin in the firelight as
she reached and sliced a chunk of meat off the roasting talbuk carcass, the female in question seemed to Durotan to be the epitome of all the ores valued. She moved with the feral grace of one of the black wolves, and her tusks were small but sharpened to deadly points. Her long black hair was pulled back in an efficient but attractive braid.
"Who-who is she?" Durotan murmured, his heart already sinking. Surely this magnificent female was a member of another clan.
He would have noticed if such a beauty-strong, supple, graceful-had been in his own clan.
Orgrim guffawed and slapped Durotan on the back. The sound and gesture caused several heads to turn in their direction, including, Durotan realized, that of the lovely female. Orgrim leaned in to whisper the words that made Durotan's spirits rise.
"You unobservant dog! She is a Frostwolf! I'd have claimed her for myself if she were of my own clan."
A Frostwolf? How in the world had Durotan failed to notice such a treasure in his own clan? He turned his gaze from Orgrim's grinning visage to look at
her again. He found her staring directly at him. Their gazes locked.
"Draka!"
The female started and turned away. Durotan blinked, as if returning to himself.
"Draka," he said quietly. No wonder he had not recognized her. "No, Orgrim. She was not a warrior born. She is a warrior made."
Draka had been born sickly, her skin a pale fawn color rather than the healthy tree-bark brown that marked most ores. For most of his childhood. Durotan remembered the adults speaking of her in low whispers, as of one already on the way to joining the ancestors. His own parents once spoke of her sadly, wondering what her family had done that the spirits would curse them with such a frail child.
It was soon after that. Durotan realized, putting the pieces together, that Draka's family had moved to the outskirts of the encampment. He had not seen much of her, busy as he was with his own duties.
Draka had sliced off several chunks of meat and brought them back to her family. Durotan noticed two younglings sitting with the ores who presumably were her parents. Both looked fit and healthy. Feeling her gaze upon him. Draka turned her head and met his eyes steadily. Her nostrils flared and she sat up straightcr. as if daring Durotan to look upon her with pity and compassion rather than admiration and respect.
No, this one did not need any pity. By the grace of the spirits, the healing of the shaman, and the power of the will he could see burning in her brown eyes, she had cast off her childhood frailty to mature into this ... this vision of female orc perfection.
His breath escaped him in a whoosh as Orgrim elbowed him. Durotan glared at his childhood friend.
"Stop gaping, it makes me want to put something in your mouth to shut it,"
Orgrim grumbled.
Durotan realized he had indeed been gaping, and that more than one knowing, grinning glance was coming his way. He returned his attention to the feast, and did not glance at Draka again for the rest of the night.
But he dreamed of her. And when he awoke, he knew that she would be his. He was heir to the chieftaincy of one of the proudest of orc clans.
What female could deny him?
"No," Draka said.
Durotan was stunned. He had approached Draka the next morning and invited her to go hunting with him the following day.
Alone. Both knew what that meant; male and female hunting in a pair was a courtship ritual. And she had rebuffed him.
It was so unexpected he did not know how to react. She watched him almost contemptuously, her lips curving around her perfect tusks in a smirk.
"Why not?" Durotan managed.
"I am not yet of age." she replied. The way she phrased it made it sound more like an excuse than a reason.
But Durotan would not be put off so easily. "I had intended this to be a courting hunt, that much is true," he said bluntly. "But if you are not of age I will respect that. Still. I would like your company. Let this be a hunt shared by two proud warriors, nothing more." Now it was her turn to be startled. Durotan guessed that Draka had expected him to cither push the point or leave in anger.
She paused, her eyes wide. Then she grinned. "I will come on such a hunt, Durotan. son of Garad, leader of the Frostwolf clan."
Durotan thought he had never been happier. This was vastly different from
the usual hunt. He and Draka had set a brisk, loping pace. All his challenges with Orgrim had given Durotan stamina, and for a moment he worried that he was going too fast. But Draka, born so fragile and now so strong, kept up with him. They did not speak much; there was little to say. They were on a hunt, they would find prey, kill it, and bring it back to their clan. The silence was easy and comfortable.
He slowed as they moved into open territory and began to scan the ground. There was no snow on the earth, so tracking was not the simple job it was in the winter months. But Durotan knew what to look for: disturbed grass, broken bush twigs, an indentation, however slight, on the soil.
"Clcfthoovcs," he said. He rose and scanned the horizon in the direction they had gone. Draka still crouched on the earth, her fingers delicately moving aside the foliage.
"One is injured," she announced.
Durotan turned to her. "I saw no blood."
She shook her head. "No blood, but the pattern of the prints tells me this." She pointed where he had looked. He saw nothing to alert him to an injured beast and shook his head, puzzled.
"No, no. not this print . . . the next. And the one after that."
She moved along, careful where she placed her feet, and suddenly Durotan saw what she had: The indentations of one hoof were slightly less deep than the other three.
The beast was limping.
He turned admiring eyes on her, and she flushed slightly. "It is easy to read." she said. "You would have found it yourself."
"No," he admitted honestly. "I did not. I saw the prints, but I did not take the time to observe them in full detail. You did. You will make an excellent
hunter one day."
She straightened and looked at him proudly. Something warm and simultaneously strengthening and weakening rushed through him. He was not one to pray, but now as he looked at Draka standing before him, he sent a quick prayer to the spirits: Let this female look agreeably upon me.
They followed the trail like wolves on the scent. Durotan had stopped leading; this female was his equal in tracking. They complemented one another well. He had the sharper eyes, but she looked more deeply at what he found. He wondered what it would be like to fight beside her. Their eyes on the earth before them, they loped around a sharp turn. He wondered what it would be like to-
The great black wolf, crouched snarling over the same animal they had been tracking, whirled. For an endless instant, three predators regarded one another. But even before the mighty beast had gathered itself to spring, Durotan had charged.
The axe felt as nothing in his arms as he lifted and struck- It sank deep into the creature's torso, but Durotan felt the retaliatory bite from yellowed teeth crunch down on his arm. Pain, white hot and shocking, coursed through him. He tore his arm free. It was harder this time to lift the axe with his arm pumping blood, but he did. The wolf had turned its attention fully upon Durotan, its yellow eyes boring into his, its mouth open in a roar. Its hot breath stank of rancid meat.
At that instant, before the great jaws could close upon his face, Durotan heard a war cry. There was a flurry of movement in the corner of his eye. Draka sprang upon the beast, her long, ornamented spear preceding her. The wolf's head snapped back as the spear pierced its midsection. In the instant of inattention, Durotan hefted his axe again and brought it down as hard as he could. He felt it cut through the animal's body, down, down, striking earth, going deep, lodging so firmly he could not pull it out immediately.
He stepped back, panting. Draka stood beside him.
He felt her warmth, her energy, her passion for the hunt as powerful as his. Together they stared at the mighty beast they had slain.
They had been taken unawares by an animal that usually required several seasoned ores to bring it down, and they were still alive.
Their foe lay dead, blood pooling beneath it, sliced in two by Durotan's axe, Draka's spear protruding from its heart. Durotan realized he would never be able to tell which of them had struck the true killing blow, and the thought made him ridiculously happy.
He sat down hard.
Draka was there, quickly washing the blood from his lacerated arm, only to mutter under her breath as more came. She tended him with healing salves and tightly wrapped bandages, along with some bitter-tasting herbs she added to the water and ordered him to drink. After a few moments, the dizziness went away.
"Thank you," he said quietly.
She nodded, not looking at him. Then a smile quirked one corner of her mouth.
"What is so funnv? That I was not able to stand?"
His voice was harsher than he had intended and she looked up quickly, surprised at his tone,
"Not at all. You fought well, Durotan. Many would have dropped their axe after such a blow,"
He felt oddly pleased by her comment, delivered as a factual statement rather than flattery. "Then . . . what amuses vou?" She grinned, meeting his eyes evenly. "I know something, and you do not know it. But . . . after this ... I think I will tell you."
He felt himself smiling too. "I am honored."
"I told you yesterday that I was not of age for a courtship hunt."
"True."
"Well... when I said that, I knew I would soon come
fir age.
"I sec," he said, though he didn't, not quite. "Well... when will you come of age?"
Her smile broadened. "Today," she said simply.
He looked at her for a long moment, then, with no word, pulled her to him and kissed her.
Talgath had been observing the ores for some time. Now, he withdrew from them, their bestial nature offending him. Being a man'ari was better. Except for the female creatures with the leathery wings and tail, man'ari slaked their lust with violence, not coupling. He preferred it that way. He would, in fact, have preferred to have slain the two on the spot, but his master had been quite clear about intervening. There would be questions asked if these two did not return to their clan, and though they were as unimportant as flics to him, flics could become a nuisance. Kil'jaeden wanted him only to observe and report back, nothing more.
And so Talgath would.
Revenge, mused Kil'jaeden, like fruit on a tree, was sweetest when allowed to fully ripen. There had been moments over the long stretch of years when he had harbored doubts about being able to locate the renegade eredar. The more Talgath shared with him, however, the more confident and delighted Kil'jaeden grew.
Talgath had served him well. He had observed the pathetic, so-called "cities"
the once-mighty Velen and his little handful of eredar had created. He had observed how they lived, hunting like the creatures who called themselves "ores," putting grain in the ground with their own hands. He had watched them trade with the hulking, barely verbal creatures, treating them with a courtesy that was positively laughable. Talgath sensed some echoes of former grandeur in their buildings and limited technology, but overall, Talgath felt that Kil'jaeden would be pleased with how low his former friend had fallen.
"Draenei," they called themselves now. The exiles. And they had named the world Dracnor.
Kil'jaeden realized that Talgath was perplexed when, rather than focusing on Velen himself, Kil'jaeden wanted to know more about the ores. How were they organized? What were some of their customs? Who were their leaders, and how were they chosen?
What was important to them as a society, as individuals?
But Talgath's job was to report, not to evaluate, and he answered his master to the best of his ability. When at last Kil'jaeden had learned everything that Talgath had learned, right down to the names of the two beasts rutting after their kill together, he was satisfied-for the moment at least.
At long last, revenge would be his. Velen and his upstart companions would be punished. But not quickly, not with an army of enhanced eredar to rend them to pieces of bloody pulp. That would be too merciful. Kil'jaeden wanted them dead, yes. But he wanted them broken. Humiliated. Crushed as utterly and completely as an insect beneath a booted foot.
And now, he knew exactly how to do it.
Six
The lessons from that time were bitter, bought with blood and death and torment. But ironically, the thing that nearly destroyed us was the thing that would redeem us later: a sense of unity. Each clan was loyal to itself, fiercely dedicated to its members, but not to others. What we united under, and against, was dreadfully wrong and for that, we are atoning stilt Generations after me will still pay for those mistakes. But the unity itself was glorious. And it is that lesson I wish to recover from the ashes. It is that lesson that caused me to speak with the leaders of so many seemingly different peoples, to work together toward goals we can all be proud of.
Unity. Harmony That is the good lesson of the past. I have learned it well.
Ner'zhul looked up into the twilight sky, content. The sunset was brilliant tonight. The ancestors must be pleased, he mused, taking a small amount of pride in the thought. Another Kosh'harg had come and gone. They seemed to him to come much harder on each other's heels than they had in the past, and each time the celebration occurred, there was something to rejoice in, and something to mourn.
His old friend, Kashur-he understood that her clan, the Frostwolves, had addressed her revcrendy as "Mother"-had passed to the ancestors. From what he had heard, she had died bravely. She had insisted on joining a hunt, something she had not done for years. The Frostwolves had hunted clcfthoovcs, and the ancient Mother had been in the vanguard of the charging warriors. She had been trampled to death before anyone could intervene to save her, and Ner'zhul knew that even as her clan mourned her, they celebrated her life and how she had chosen to depart it. Such was the way of the ores. He wondered if he would see her, and then chided himself for the thought. He would see her if she saw fit to reveal herself to him. Death was not the vast desert of sorrow to a shaman that it was to other orcs,for they had the privilege to again be in the presence of the beloved dead, learn their wisdom, feel their affection.
The Frostwolves had had a double tragedy, for the intervening time between Kosh'hargs had claimed their leader Garad as well.
The Frostwolves had had the misfortune on one deceptively sunny day to stumble across no fewer than three ogres and one of their monstrous masters. The hideous creatures were stupid but fierce.
and the gronn was a cunning foe. The ores were victorious, but at a grave cost. Despite all the healers could do, Garad and several others died from their injuries that black day.
But in the sorrow of losing a leader, and one that Ner'zhul had known and respected, was the joy of seeing new blood come into its own. Kashur had spoken well of young Durotan, and from all Ner'zhul had seen, the youth would make a fine leader. He had watched as Durotan was named chieftain, and had noticed an attractive, fierce-looking female looking on with more than simple clan interest in the proceedings. Ner'zhul felt certain that by the next Kosh'harg, the lovely Draka would be the mate of the new Frostwolf chieftain.
He sighed, sifting through the images in his mind while filling his eyes with the delights of the glorious sunset. The years came and went, and gave their blessings, and demanded their sacrifices.
He went to his small hut, which he had once shared with a mate who had passed to the ancestors several years ago. Rulkan visited him from time to time, imparting no words of wisdom, but filling his heart with tenderness and opening him afresh to the needs of his people each time her spirit brushed his. He missed her rough laughter and her warmth beside him at night, but he was content.
Perhaps, he mused, Rulkan would come to him in a vision tonight.
He prepared a potion, chanting over it softly, then drinking it slowly. It would not actually cause a vision; nothing would unless the ancestors willed it, and sometimes visions came upon him when he least expected them. But over many long years the shaman had learned that some herbs opened the mind
while one slept, so mat if one was indeed granted the gift of a vision, one would remember it more clearly the following morning.
Ner'zhul closed his eyes, and then opened them again almost immediately, although he knew he was fast asleep.
They were standing on a mountaintop, he and his beloved Rulkan. At first he thought they were observing the sunset together, then realized that the sun was rising, not descending into slumber for the night. The sky was glorious, but in a way that roused and moved him rather than calmed and comforted him. The colors were scarlet and purple and orange, almost violent, and Ner'zhul's heart lifted.
Rulkan turned to him, smiling, and for the first time since she had exhaled her final breath as a living being, she spoke to him.
"Ner'zhul, my mate, this is a new beginning,"
He gasped, trembling, overcome with love for her, flooded with a simmering excitement roused by the vibrant colors of the sunrise. A new beginning?
"You have led our people well," she said. "But the time has come to deepen the old ways, take them further, for the good of all."
Something rose inside his mind to nudge at his conscious thought. Rulkan had not been a shaman. She
had not been a chieftain. She had only been her wonderful self, which had been more than enough for Ner'zhul, but she had held no position in life that would make it likely that she would speak so authoritatively. Annoyed at his lack of faith, Ner'zhul pushed the voice down. He was not a spirit. He was only flesh and blood and though he understood the spirit ways more than most, he also knew that there was much he would never understand until he stood with them. Why wouldn't Rulkan speak for the ancestors?
"I am listening," he said.
She smiled. "I knew you would," she said. "There are dark and dangerous times ahead for the ores. Hitherto, we have only come together at the Kosh'harg festivals. Such isolation must end if we are to survive as a race. Rulkan looked into the sunrise, her face thoughtful and shadowed. Ner'zhul ached to hold her, to take her burdens as his own as he always had in life. But now, he knew he could not touch her, nor force her to speak. So he sat silently, drinking in her beauty, cars straining for her voice.
"There is upon this world a blight," Rulkan said quietly. "It must be eliminated."
"Say it, and it will be done," Ner'zhul swore fervently. "I will always honor the advice of the ancestors.
She turned to him then, her eyes searching his as the light grew brighter. "When it is eliminated, our people will stand proud and tall . . . even more than they are now. Power and strength will be ours. This world will be ours. And you . . . you, Ner'zhul, will lead them."
Something in the way she said the words made Ner'zhul's heart leap. He was already powerful. He was honored, perhaps even revered, by his own clan, the Shadowmoon dan. He was the leader of all the orcs,in fact if not in name. But now desire stirred in his heart for more. And fear stirred in him too, dark and unpleasant, but something that must be faced.
"What is this threat that must be eliminated before the ores can claim what is rightfully theirs?"
She told him.
"What docs this mean?" Durotan asked.
He broke his fast with the two people in his clan he trusted most: Draka, his intended, whom he would wed with full ceremony at the next full moon, and Drek'Thar, the new head shaman of the clan.
Durotan, along with everyone else, had mourned the passing of Mother Kashur. Durotan knew in his bones that she had intended to die that day, and wished to make a good death. She would be missed, but Drek'Thar had proved himself a worthy successor.
Fighting back his personal grief, he had stepped in as the primary healer of the hunt then and subsequently. Kashur would have been proud. Now the three sat and ate in the chieftain's tent, where Durotan. chieftain
since his father's death in battle against the gronn and their ogres, now dwelt.
Durotan was referring to the letter that had recently arrived, borne by a long, lean courier on a long, lean black wolf. He again perused its contents as he ate porridge made from blood and grain.
Unto Durotan, Chieftain of the Frostwolf clan, the shaman Ner'zhul gives greetings. I have been granted visions by the ancestors that concern us all, as orcs,rather than as individual clan members. I would speak with the leaders of all the clans on the twelfth day of this moon, as well as every shaman of every clan. You are to come to the foot of the sacred mountain. Meat and drink will be provided. If you cannot attend, I will take it as a sign that you do not care for the future of our people and act accordingly.
Forgive my brusqueness, but this matter is of the utmost urgency. Please respond via my courier.
Durotan had made the courier wait while he discussed the matter. The courier seemed quite put out, but agreed to stay for a brief time. The aromatic smell of the porridge, wafting from a large cauldron, perhaps helped convince him.
"I do not know, other than that obviously Ner'zhul feels this is of extreme importance," Drek'Thar admitted. "Such a thing has never happened outside of the Kosh'harg ceremonies. Always the shaman have a meeting then, in the presence of the ancestors who wish to attend. But never outside of that. And I have never heard of anyone summoning the chieftains. But I have known Ner'zhul all my life. He is a wise and great shaman. If the spirits were to speak to any of us about something that threatens us all, they would speak
through him."
Draka growled, "Summoning you like you are pets to come at his call." she muttered. "I mislike this. Durotan. It smacks of arrogance."
"I do not disagree with you," Durotan said. His hackles had risen at the tone of the letter and at first he had been inclined to refuse.
But as he read it again, he looked past the haughty words to the intent of the letter. Something was definitely troubling the one orc everyone respected, and surely that was worth a few days' travel.
Draka watched him. her eyes narrowing. He looked at her and smiled.
"I will go, then. And all my shaman."
Draka frowned. "I will come with you."
"I think it would be best if-"
Draka snarled. "I am Draka, daughter of Kclkar, son of Rhakish. I am your intended, soon to be your life partner. You will not forbid me to accompany you!"
Durotan threw back his head and laughed, warm inside at the display of Draka's spirit. He had chosen well, all right. From one born weak had come strength and fire. The Frostwolf clan would flourish with her by his side.
"Call in the courier, then, if he has finished his meal," Durotan said, humor still lacing his deep voice. "Tell him that we will come to this strange meeting of Ner'zhul's, but we had best be assured of its necessity when we are there."
The Frostwolf leader and shaman were among the first to arrive. Ner'zhul himself greeted them, and the moment Durotan laid eyes on the shaman he knew that he had been right to come. While Ner'zhul was not a young ore, Durotan thought he had aged years in the few months since the last Kosh'harg. He looked . .. thinner, almost wasted, as if he had not been eating
for some while. And his eyes looked haunted. He grasped Durotan's broad shoulders with hands that trembled, and his thanks were sincere.
This was no arrogant play for power, but a genuine feeling of threat. Durotan inclined his head, then left to see his people settled in.
Over the next few hours, as the sun sank toward the horizon, Durotan watched a steady stream of ores progress to the flat mcadowlands at the base of the sacred mountain, almost as if gathering there for the Kosh'harg festival. He saw the bright banners that announced every clan fluttering in the breeze, and he felt a smile curve his face when he saw the symbol of the Blackrock clan-Orgrim's clan. Since they had become adults, the two boyhood friends had found their time together limited, and while Orgrim had attended Durotan's chieftain ceremony, they had not seen one another since, Durotan was pleased but not altogether surprised to see that Orgrim marched only a step behind Blackhand. the hulking and intimidating leader of the Blackrock clan.
Durotan's old friend was now second in command, then.
Draka followed her future mate's gaze and grunted, also pleased. She got along very well with Orgrim, for which Durotan was grateful. He was fortunate that the two people who mattered the most to him could be friends with one another.
While Blackhand was speaking with Ner'zhul, Orgrim threw Durotan a glance and a wink. Durotan grinned back. He was
troubled by Ner'zhul's appearance, but at the very least, this gathering would give him a chance to visit with Orgrim. Even as Durotan had that thought, however, Blackhand turned away with a snort and waved for Orgrim to follow. Durotan felt the smile on his face ebb; if Blackhand demanded that Orgrim attend him throughout this meeting, then even that pleasure would be denied him.
Draka, who knew him so well, reached for his hand and squeezed it. She said nothing, she did not have to. Durotan looked down at her and smiled.
Word came from the same long, lean courier that Ner'zhul would not hold the meeting until tomorrow, as various clans would still be trickling in through the night. The Frostwolf encampment was smaller than most but more harmonious than many They had brought traveling tents and furs, and the courier had seen to it that they had been given plenty of meat, fish, and fruit. A haunch of talbuk now turned slowly over the fire, its tantalizing scent keeping the appetite sharp even as the ores feasted on raw fish. There were a total of eleven-Durotan, Draka, Drek'Thar, and eight of his shaman. Some of them looked very young to Durotan, but while shaman certainly could grow in skill over time, once the ancestors had appeared to them in visions they were all accorded equal honor and respect.
A shadowy form appeared beyond the ring of the fire's illumination. Durotan got to his feet and drew himself to his full imposing height, just in case the visitor had had too much to drink and had come with belligerent intent. Then the wind shifted and he laughed as he caught Orgrim's scent.
"Welcome, my old friend," he cried as he went to roughly embrace the other ore. Tall as Durotan was, Orgrim was still bigger, as he had been in their youth. As he regarded the Blackrock second in command, Durotan privately marveled how he had been able to best Orgrim in anything.
Orgrim grunted and clapped Durotan on the shoulder. "Your gathering is small, but it smells the best of any of them," he said, looking at the roasting meat and sniffing appreciatively.
"Then tear off a hunk of talbuk and leave your duties behind for a while," Draka said. "Would that I could," Orgrim sighed, "but I do not have much time. If the Frostwolf chieftain would walk with me a bit, I would be honored."
"Let us walk, then," Durotan replied.
They left the encampment and walked in silence for a time, until the campfircs were small, twinkling lights in the distance and they were assured that there were no prying eyes or cars to witness them. Both ores sniffed the wind as well. Orgrim stood silently for a while, and Durotan waited with the
patience of the true hunter.
At last, Orgrim spoke. "Blackhand did not want us to come," he said. "He thought it demeaning, that Ner'zhul would summon us like we were pets to his call."
"Draka and I had that reaction as well, but I am glad we did. You saw Ner'zhul's face. One look at him was all I needed to determine that we had been right to come."
Orgrim snorted derisively. "For myself as well, but when I left the camp, Blackhand was still raging against the shaman. He does not see what you and I do."
It was not Durotan's place to speak ill of another clan leader, but neither was it any secret what most ores thought of Blackhand.
He was certainly a powerful ore, fully in his prime, bigger and stronger than any orc Durotan had ever seen. And he was also certainly not stupid. But there was an air about him that raised Durotan's hackles. Durotan decided to hold his tongue.
"I see your struggle even in the darkness, my old friend," Orgrim said quietly. "You do not have to speak for me to know what you would say. He is my chieftain, I have sworn loyalty to him and I will not break that oath. But even I have my misgivings."
The admission startled Durotan. "You do?"
Orgrim nodded. "I am torn, Durotan; torn between my loyalties and what my mind and heart tell mc. May you never be put in such a position. As second, I can help moderate him somewhat, but not much. He is clan leader, and he has the power. I can only hope that he will listen to others tomorrow and not stubbornly sit on his wounded pride."
Durotan fervently shared that hope. If things were indeed as bad as Ner'zhul's expression seemed to indicate, the last thing he wanted to see was the leader
of one of the most powerful clans behaving like a spoiled child.
His eye fell upon a dark shape on Orgrim's back. Pride and sorrow both flooded him as he spoke. "You carry the Doomhammer now. I did not know of your father's passing."
"He died bravely and well," Orgrim said. He hesitated, then said, "Do you remember that day long ago when We ran afoul of the ogre and the draenei saved us?"
"I could never forget it," Durotan said.
"Their prophet spoke of the time when I would receive the Doomhammer," Orgrim said. "I was so excited at the thought of wielding it in the hunt. That was the first time ! understood-I mean really understood-that the day it became my weapon would be the day I would be fatherless."
He unstrapped the weapon from his back and hoisted it. It was like watching a dancer. Durotan thought-a balance of power and grace. The moon shone down upon Orgrim's strong body as he moved, crouched, sprang, swung. Finally, breathing heavily and sweating, Orgrim replaced the legendary weapon.
"It is a glorious thing." Orgrim said quietly. "A weapon of power. A weapon of prophecy. The pride of my lineage. And I would shatter it into a thousand pieces with my own hands if it would bring my father back."
Without another word, Orgrim strode back toward the small cluster of twinkling fires. Durotan made no move to follow. He sat for a long time, staring up at the stars, sensing deep within his soul that the world he would behold upon awakening tomorrow would be radically different than the one he had known all his life.
Seven
I know well that we lost more than we gained, we ores. At that point, our culture was unspoiled, innocent, pure. We were like children who had always been safe, loved, and protected. But children need to grow up, and we as a people were too easily manipulated.
There is a place for trust; no one can accuse me of not knowing this. But we must also be careful. Those who have fair faces can deceive, and even those whom we believe in with all our souls can beguiled.
It is the loss of our innocence that I lament when I think back to what those days must have been like. And it was our innocence that led to our downfall.
It was a long line of solemn faces that turned to look at die gathered leaders of the orc clans. Durotan stood next to Draka, his arm about her waist in a protective gesture, although he was not sure why he felt she needed defending. His eyes widened as they met Drek'Thar's and he saw in his friend and advisor's face something that chilled him to the bone.
He wished he could stand with Orgrim, They were of different clans and different traditions, but other than his intended, there was no one Durotan trusted more. But Orgrim, of course, stood beside his chieftain Blackhand, who looked around at the gathered shaman with thinly concealed annoyance.
"He has been too long away from the hunt, that one," Draka murmured, nodding in Blackhand's direction. "He is spoiling for a fight."
Durotan sighed. "He may well get it. Look at their faces."
"I have never seen Drek'Thar so, not even when Mother Kashur's body was broken," Draka said.
Durotan did not reply, merely nodded and continued to observe.
Ner'zhul strode forward into the center of the gathered crowd. Everyone moved back to give him room. He began to walk sunwise in a circle, murmuring. Then he paused and lifted his hands. Fire burst forth in front of him, leaping skyward in a display that brought soft sounds of appreciation even from those who had seen such things many times before. It stood, towering over them for a long moment, then subsided, settling down to become a traditional bonfire, albeit a magical one.
"As the darkness falls, in more ways than one, sit you beside the fire," Ner'zhul commanded. "Let each clan sit to itself, with its own shaman, and I will call you forth to speak when the time is right."
"Perhaps you wish us to fetch a slain beast for you, too," came a fierce, angry voice. "And lie obediently at your feet at night!"
Durotan knew that voice; he had heard it raised often enough at the Kosh'harg festivals in his youth, and had heard its owner utter cries to chill the blood during hunts. It was distinctive and unmistakable. He turned to look at Grom Hcllscream, the youthful leader of the Warsong clan, and hoped that the outburst would not overly delay whatever it was Ner'zhul had to tell them all.
Hcllscream stood in the front of his clan, more slender man most orcs,but still tall and imposing. The Warsong colors were red and black, and while Hcllscream wore no armor, the simple learners in those strong hues served to send an imposing message nonetheless. He folded his arms and glared at Ner'zhul.
Ner'zhul did not rise to the bait, merely sighed deeply. "Many of you feel your honor is offended, this I know. Give me leave to speak, and you will be glad that you are here. Your children's children will be glad of it."
Hcllscream growled and his eyes flashed, but he said no more. He stood for a moment longer, then with a shrug, as if to indicate that it was by his own will, he sat. His clan followed his lead.
Ner'zhul waited until there was quiet, and then began to speak. "I have had a vision." he said, "from one of the ancestors whom I trust more than I can
possibly say. She has revealed to me a threat, lurking like a poisonous scorpion under a flowering bush. All the other shaman can attest to this, and the)I will, once they have opportunity to speak. It grieves and infuriates me that we have been so duped."
Durotan hung on the shaman's words, his heart racing. Who was this mysterious enemy? How had so dark a foe escaped their notice?
Ner'zhul sighed, looking down on the ground, then shook himself. His voice was deep and confident, if laced with sorrow.
"The enemy of which I speak," he said heavily, "is the draenei."
Chaos erupted.
Durotan stared, disbelieving. He looked around, seeking Orgrim's gaze, and stared into his friend's wide, gray eyes, seeing there the same stunned shock that he himself felt. The draenei? Surely something was wrong. The gronn, yes, perhaps they had stumbled across some secret knowledge to use against the hated ores .. . but no. Not the draenei.
They were not even fighters on the level that the ores were. They hunted, yes, that was true, but they needed meat as much as any orc in order to survive. They could stand against the gronn, and sometimes had assisted a hunting party a time or two. Durotan's thoughts went back to the day when two young ore
children were fleeing before an ogre whose footsteps made the earth tremble, and the tall, blue figures that had appeared out of nowhere to save them.
Why would they risk themselves to save two boys if they were truly as methodically evil as Ner'zhul believed? It made no sense.
Nothing about any of this made sense.
Ner'zhul was clamoring for silence, and not getting it. Btackhand was on his feet, veins standing out in his thick neck, while Orgrim was doing what he
could to placate his chieftain. Then a terrible noise pierced the air, shattering the cars and almost stopping the heart. Grom Hcllscrcam stood as well, his head thrown back, his chest thrust forward and his black jaw open so wide it seemed almost to have unhinged itself like a snake's. Nothing could compete with Hcllscrcam's war cry, and stunned silence ensued.
Grom opened his eyes and grinned at Ner'zhul, who seemed completely nonplussed at having a former antagonist become an ally so quickly.
"Let the shaman continue." Hcllscrcam said. So utter was the silence after his outburst that the words were heard by all, even though they were spoken in a conversational tone. "I want to hear more of this new, old enemy."
Ner'zhul smiled gratefully. "I know this startles you. It shocked me as well. But the ancestors do not lie. These seemingly benevolent people have been waiting for years until the time is right to attack us. They sit safely behind their strange buildings made of materials we do not understand, and they harbor secrets that could benefit us greatly."
"But why?" Durotan spoke even before he himself realized he had. Heads turned to look at him, but he did not back down. "Why do they want to attack us? If they harbor such vast secrets, what do they need from us? And how could we possibly defeat them if this is true?"
Ner'zhul looked discomfited. "That, I do not know, but I do know that the ancestors are concerned."
"We outnumber them," Blackhand growled.
"Not by that much," Durotan shot back. "Not against their superior knowledge. They came here on a ship that sails between worlds. Blackhand. Think you they will fall to arrows and axes?"
Blackhand's heavy brows drew together. He opened his mouth to retort.
"This has been simmering like a stew on the fire for many decades," Ner'zhul interrupted, forestalling the argument. "Resolution and eventual victory will
not come overnight. I do not ask you to go to war this moment, but simply to be aware. To prepare. To discuss with your shaman the right course of action. And to open your minds and hearts to a union that will ensure triumph."
He spread his hands imploringly. "We are separate clans, yes, each with its own traditions and heritage. I am not asking you to give up that proud history, merely asking you to open your minds to a unity that
takes clans that are strong alone and turns them into an unstoppable force. We are all orcs! Blackrock, Warsong, Thundcrlord, Dragonmaw . . . don't you see how little those distinctions matter? We are the same people! In the end, we want safe homes for our young, success in the hunt, mates who love us, honor among the ancestors. We are more alike than different."
Durotan knew this to be true and glanced over at his friend. Orgrim stood behind his chieftain, tall and imposing and solemn. Yet when he felt Durotan's gaze on him, he met that gaze and nodded.
There had been those who had protested this unusual friendship between two adventuresome and, Durotan had to admit, trouble-prone youths. But Durotan would not be who he was today if he had not drawn from Orgrim's steady strength; and he knew in his bones that Orgrim felt the same about him.
But the draenei...
"May I speak?"
The voice belonged to Drek'Thar, and Durotan turned, surprised. The question seemed to be addressed not only to his chieftain, but to the shaman who had been a mentor to all of them. Ner'zhul looked at Durotan, who nodded.
"My chieftain," Drek'Thar said, and to Durotan's shock his voice trembled, "my chieftain, what Ner'zhul has said is true. Mother Kashur confirmed it."
The other Frostwolf shaman nodded. Durotan stared at them. Mother Kashur? If there was anyone Durotan trusted, it was that wise old ore. His mind went
back to the moment when he stood in the cavern, feeling the cold air that was not air on his face, listening and watching with every fiber of his being as Mother Kashur spoke to someone he could not see but who he knew was there,
"Mother Kashur said the draenei are our enemies?" he asked, hardly able to believe his cars,
Drek'Thar nodded.
"It is time for the clan chieftains to listen to their own shaman, as Durotan has done," said Ner'zhul. "We will reconvene at twilight, and the chieftains will tell me their thoughts. These are the people you know and trust. Ask them what they have seen,"
The gathered crowd began to disperse. Slowly, looking at one another cautiously, the Frostwolf clan wandered back to their own encampment. As one, they sat in a circle and turned their attention to Drek'Thar, who began to speak slowly and carefully.
"The draenei are not our friends," he said. "My chieftain ... I know you and the Doomhammer Blackrock stayed with them one night, I know that you spoke well of them, I know that it appears that they saved your life. But let me ask you . . . did nothing strike you amiss?"
Durotan recalled the ogre bearing down on them, bellowing in fury, its club swinging. And with an uncomfortable sensation, he recalled how very, very quickly the draenei appeared to rescue him and Orgrim. How they could not return home as it was so conveniently close to twilight.
He frowned. It was an uncharitable thought, and yet...
"Your brow furrows, my chieftain. I take it, then, that your youthful faith in them is now starting to wane?"
Durotan did not answer, nor did he look at his clan's head shaman. He stared down at the earth, not wanting to feel this way, but unable to stop the doubt
from creeping into his heart, like the cold fingers of a frosty morning.
In his memory, he again spoke to Restalaan, telling the tall blue draenei, "We were not as we are now."
"No, you are not," Restalaan had said. "We have watched the ores grow in strength and skill and talent. You have impressed us,"
He felt again a sharp sting, as if the compliment were a carefully crafted insult. As if the draenei thought they were superior .. .
even with their strange, unnatural blue skin, their legs shaped like those of common talbuks, with long, reptilian tails and shiny blue hooves instead of decent feet like the ores had-
"Speak, my chieftain. What do you recall?"
Durotan told him in a rough and heavy voice of the fortuitous arrival of the draenei, of Restalaan's near arrogance, "And . . . and Velen, their prophet, asked many questions about us, and he was not making idle conversation. He truly seemed to want to know about the ores." "Of course he did," Drek'Thar said. "What an opportunity! They have been plotting against us since they arrived.
And to find two-forgive me. Durotan. but two young and naive children to tell them everything they wanted to know? It must have been quite an event."
The ancestors would not lie to them, especially about something so important. Durotan knew this. And now that he recalled the events of that day and night in this new light of knowledge, it was obvious how suspicious Velen's actions had been. And yet . . .
was Velen such a master of deceit that the sensation of trust both Orgrim and Durotan had felt had been all a lie?
Durotan bowed his head.
"There is part of me that doubts yet, my friends," he said quietly. "And yet, I cannot stake the future of our people on such thin ice as my own personal doubts. Ner'zhul did not propose an assault tomorrow. He asked for us to train, and watch, and prepare, and draw closer as a people. This I will do, for the good of the Frostwolves and the good of the ores."
He looked at each worried face in turn, some merely friends, some, like Drek'Thar and Draka, known and loved.
"The Frostwolf clan will prepare for war."
Eight
How easily the mind can be turned to hate from a place of fear- an instinctive, natural, protective response. Instead of focusing on the things that unite us, we focus on what divides us. My skin is green; yours is pink. I have tusks; you have long ears. Mysfein is bare;yours is covered with fir. I breathe air; you do not. If we had dung to such things, the Burning Legion would not have been defeated, for I would never have wished to ally with Jaina Proudmoore, or fight alongside elves. My people would then not have survived to befriend the tauren, or the forsaken.
So it was with draenei. Our skin was reddish-brown then; theirs was blue. We had feet, they had hooves and a tail. We lived mostly in the open, they lived in enclosed spaces. We had a fairly short life span; no one knew how long-lived they were.
Nevermind that they had shown us nothing but courtesy and openness. That they had traded with us, taught us, shared whatever they were asked to share. That had no bearing now. We had heard from the ancestors, and we saw with our own eyes how different they were.
My prayer, every day, is for wisdom to guide my people. And in that prayer is couched a plea, never to be blinded by such trivial differences.
The training began. It had always been custom among nearly every clan to begin training the younglings once they celebrated their sixth year, but previously, the training had been serious but relaxed. Weapons were for hunting animals, not sentient beings who had their own weapons and skills and technological advantages, and there were plenty of hunters who could easily bring down prey. A young orc learned at his or her own pace, and there was plenty of time for play and enjoying simply being young.
No longer.
The plea for unity among the ores was answered. The couriers exhausted their beasts riding to and fro between clans carrying messages. At one point some bright fellow came up with the idea of training bloodhawks to carry the letters. It took some doing and did not happen overnight, but gradually, Durotan grew used to seeing the scarlet birds fluttering to Drek'Thar and others in the clan. He approved of the idea; every warm body was needed if battle plans were to be successful.
While spears, arrows, axes, and other weapons worked well against the animals of the fields and
forests, they would need to be supplemented with other types of weapons if they were to be used against the draenei. Protection would be vital, and whereas before the smiths and lcathcrcraftcrs focused on armor that would blunt attacks from claws and teeth, now they had to create things that would save the wearer if he were impaled or slashed by a sword. Those who understood the craft of smithing had been few previously; now, the master smiths found themselves teaching dozens at a time. The forges rang day and night with the sound of hammers and the hiss of hot metal being plunged into water barrels. Many spent long days swinging picks, forcing the earth to yield the necessary minerals for crafting weapons and metal armor. Hunts, which had been conducted as the need arose, now were daily events, as food needed to be dried and preserved and skins were required for armor.
The younglings who lined up for training looked very young indeed to Durotan, who was one of many instructors. He recalled his father teaching him the ways of axe and spear. What would he think of these small ones, all but buckling beneath shiny metal armor, holding weapons that no orc had ever before borne?
Draka, with whom he had joined in a quick, quiet ritual as he did not want to take time or resources away from war training, touched his back gently. Always, she knew what he was thinking.
"It would be better if we had been born in a time of peace," she agreed. "Even the most bloodthirsty knows the truth of that. But We are where we are, my
mate, and I know vou will not shirk this task."
He smiled sadly at her. "Nay, I will not. We are warriors. We thrive on the hunt, on the challenge, on the spilling of blood and the cries of victory. They are small, but they are not weak. They will learn. They are Frostwolves." He paused, then added fiercely,
"They are ores."
"Time is passing," said Rulkan.
"I know . . . but you would not have our people go into battle unprepared," Ner'zhul replied. "The draenei are vastly superior as it stands now."
Rulkan grunted unhappily, then smiled. Ner'zhul looked at her. Was it his imagination, or did the smile seem forced?
"We are training as fast as We can," Ner'zhul added quickly, not wishing to offend the spirit who had been his lifematc.
Rulkan was silent. Clearly, it was not fast enough.
"Perhaps you can help us," he said. He was aware that he was babbling. "Perhaps there is knowledge you have that.. . that..."
Rulkan frowned, then cocked her head. "I have told you all I know," she said, "but there are other powers . . . other beings . . . that the living do not know of."
Ner'zhul almost stumbled at her words. "There are the elements, and there are the ancestral spirits," he managed. "What other beings are there?"
She smiled at him. "You yet breathe, my mate. You are not ready to treat with them. They are the ones who have been aiding us, so that We may aid you, the beloved ones We left behind."
"No!" Ner'zhul realized he was pleading, but he could not help it. "Please . . . We need aid if We are to protect the future generations from the draenei's
insidious plots."
He did not say that he was enjoying being the center of attention from every single orc in every single clan. He did not say that her earlier promise of power had made him think on such things, and begin to desire them. But even more than that, she had instilled such terror of the monstrous draenei that this sudden holding back on her part unnerved him totally.
Rulkan looked at him appraisingly. "Perhaps you are right," she said. "I will see if they will speak to you. There is one whom t trust the most, whose concern for our people is deep and abiding. I will ask him."
He nodded, almost ridiculously pleased at her words, then blinked awake. A smile stretched his lips.
Soon. He would see this mysterious spirit, this benefactor, very soon.
Gul'dan smiled at him as he brought in fruit and fish to break his master's fast. 'Another vision, my master?" He bowed low as he presented the food and cup of steaming herbal tea. Upon Rulkan's advice, Ner'zhul had begun drinking a tincture of certain herbs brewed to a precise strength. Rulkan assured him that it would continue to ensure that his mind and spirit remained open to visions. Ner'zhul had found the concoction unpleasant at first, but had showed no sign of his dislike. Now, he found he enjoyed the beverage first thing in the morning and three more times throughout the day. He accepted the cup and sipped it as he nodded in response to Gul'dan's question.
"Indeed . . . and I have learned something important. Gul'dan, for as long as there have been orcs,there have been shaman. And the shaman work with the elements and with the ancestors,"
Gul'dan's face wore an expression of puzzlement. "Yes ... of course ..."
Ner'zhul couldn't stifle a grin that stretched his lips wide over his tusks. "And that is still true. But there is more than we know of.
More that the ancestors can sec, but we as living beings cannot. Rulkan has
told me she has been in contact with such beings.
They have wisdom and knowledge even beyond that of the ancestors, and they will come to us to aid us. Rulkan says there is one in particular who has chosen to take the ores under his wing. And soon . . . soon he will show himself to me!"
Gul'dan's eyes sparkled. 'And ... to me too. perhaps, master?"
Ner'zhul smiled. "You are a strong one, Gul'dan," he said. "I would not have chosen you as my apprentice if that were not the case. Yes, I think so. When he has deemed you worthy, as he has deemed me."
Gul'dan lowered his head. "May it be so." he said. "I am so honored to serve. This is a time of great glory for the ores. We are blessed to live to see it."
The Blackrock clan, with Blackhand himself in the vanguard, had begged for the honor of being the first to strike. There had been some resentment and grumbling, but the hunting skills of the Blackrock were legendary, and they were logical first choice as they also lived fairly near Telmor. one of the smaller, more isolated cities. They had been given the first efforts at armor, swords, metal-tipped arrows, and other weapons of war that would bring down the draenei.
Orgrim, the Doomhammer strapped across his back and clad from head to foot in metal that made him chafe and feel confined, rode at his chieftain's side. The wolf beneath him seemed to have an equal dislike of the heavy armor, and now and then turned his massive head to snap at Orgrim's leg, as if at some insect that annoyed him. He also seemed to be laboring a bit as he bore his rider across the soft meadow grass, panting more than usual, pink tongue lolling.
Orgrim muttered under his breath. It had sounded so simple: go to war against this new, insidious foe. But when they had all, including Orgrim, stood and cheered the decision, no one had stopped to think of how difficult it would be simply to prepare.
They would need to breed the wolves for size even more now, if the animals were to carry armor as well as orc bodies already heavy with dense bone and powerful muscle.
The weapons were not untried. Several times already they had attacked the ogres, rationalizing that although they were lumbering and stupid and the draenei were quick and intelligent, fighting them was more akin to fighting the new enemy than killing talbuk would be. They had lost a few. at first, who were burned on a pyre with due ceremony for their honorable sacrifice. The weapons felt alien in their hands, the armor slowed them down, but each time, the attacks went more smoothly. The last time, they had faced not only a pair of ogres but one of their masters, a gronn who had the ferocity of the ogres it dominated and a vile cleverness that made it a much more challenging foe. Two brave Blackrock soldiers fell before Orgrim got in the final blow, swinging his hammer of prophecy and bringing doom upon the bellowing gronn.
Blackhand stood beside him, panting and sweating, blood, his own and that of the creature they had just slain, spattering his face.
He wiped his face with his mailed hand and licked the blood, grunting.
"Two ogres and their master," he muttered, reaching out a hand to clap Orgrim on the shoulder. "The pitiful draenei do not stand a chance against our might!"
Standing sweating in the sun, its bright light glinting off the metal plate and almost blinding his eyes, Orgrim agreed. Bloodlust rose high in him. He trusted Ner'zhul and the shaman of his clan. Further, he had spoken with Durotan. and they both agreed that though they had been treated fairly by the draenei on that long-ago day when they had been rescued by the blucskins, there had been something peculiar about them. The spirits had never guided them falsely before. Why would they do so now?
But as he rode alongside his lord to where a small hunting party had been reported. Orgrim had misgivings. What if the draenei had been odd? Surely the ores must have seemed odd to them when they first arrived. Was death
truly an appropriate punishment for being different? When had there been a single attack on an orc by the draenei? A single insult or offense, even? Now eighteen Blackrock warriors, armed to the teeth, their bodies coated in protective metal, were riding to slaughter a group of the blucskins who were doing nothing more threatening than gathering food for their people. Unexpected and unwanted, an image rose in Orgrim's mind of the young draenei girl who had smiled shyly at them. Was it her father or mother who would die here on this gloriously sunny day?
"You look lost in thought Orgrim," said Blackhand in his gravelly voice, startling Orgrim momentarily. "What fills your mind, my second?"
The face of an orphan, thought Orgrim, but did not say. Instead, he said gruffly, "I was wondering what color draenei blood was."
Blackhand threw back his oversized head and laughed heartily. Orgrim heard a harsh caw and the sound of frantic wingbcats as the very crows took flight at the noise of the Blackrock chieftain's laughter.
"I will make sure your face is painted in it," Blackhand said, chuckling.
Orgrim's jaw tightened and he said nothing. The ancestors do not lie, he thought grimly. A child is innocent, always, but its parents have earned death, if they are plotting against us as the spirits have said.
They came upon them with ridiculous ease, not bothering to hide their approach. The scout had said the hunting party numbered eleven, six males and five females, and they had encountered a herd of cleft-hooves. While the great, shaggy beasts were strong and difficult to bring down, they did not have the aggressiveness of a roused herd of talbuks, and the draenei hunting party had already managed to isolate a young bull. It roared, pawing the earth and lowering its head, aiming its single horn at its attackers, but the outcome was assured.
Or it would have been, had it not been for the arrival of the ores.
Blackhand drew his company to a halt on a ridge. Orgrim could smell the
excitement from his kinsmen. Their bodies quivered with anticipation in their newly crafted armor, their hands clenched and unclenched, wanting to curl about the weapons that were only now becoming familiar. Blackhand held up a mailed fist, his
small eyes fastened on the activity below, waiting for the right moment to swoop down like a hawk on a meadow rat.
The Blackrock chieftain turned to his shaman, who were in the back. They, too, wore armor, but carried no weapons; they did not need to. They would heal their brethren as they fell, and also direct the immense power of the elements toward their foe.
"You are ready?" he asked.
The eldest among them nodded. His eyes glowed fiercely and his lips were curved in a smile. He, too, wanted to see draenei blood shed this day.
Blackhand grunted and brought his fist down. The Blackrock warriors charged.
They uttered their battle cries as they came, and the blucskins turned, startled. At first, only surprise registered on those faces. No doubt they merely wondered why such a great number of mounted orc warriors were coming to aid them in the kill. It was only when Blackhand, atop his monstrous wolf, brought his two-handed broadsword down in a smooth blow that severed their leader in half that the draenei realized that the ores had come not for the clefthoof, but for them.
To their credit, they did not stare in stunned horror at the sight, but sprang immediately into action. Voices that held only the faintest tremor of fear uttered words in a liquid-sounding, alien tongue. Although Orgrim did not recognize the words-Durotan had the gift of recall for such things, not he- the sound was familiar. He knew what to expect from that long-ago day when the draenei had rescued him and Durotan, and had prepared his kinsmen. So when the sky crackled with unnatural blue and silver lightning, the shaman were ready. They blasted the strange bolts of light with lightning of their
own. The brightness was almost blinding, and Orgrim looked down quickly, his focus on the draenei warrior in front of him wielding a staff that glowed and sparked. He roared and lifted the Doomhammer over his head and brought it crashing down upon his enemy. The armor the
draenei warrior wore could not withstand such an attack and crumpled like a thin tin bracelet. Blood and brains spattered the ground.
Orgrim looked up, searching for his next target. Some of the Blackrocks were held in the magical netting created by the draenei's foul, unnatural lightning. They were proud and strong warriors, but they screamed in agony as the netting burned its way into their skin. The acrid odor of burning flesh mixed with the reck of blood and fear in Orgrim's nostrils. It was an intoxicating smell.
He felt a wind brush his face, chasing away the scents of battle and infusing his lungs with energy. Orgrim selected the one he would next kill and raced toward the warrior, a female who had no weapon but who was wreathed in pulsating blue energy.
Orgrim grunted in surprise as the Doomhammer struck die field and bounced off, the shock shivering up the weapon into his arms and jarring him to the bone. One
of the shaman stepped in, the crackling sound of lightning vying with the mysterious, magical energies of the draenei, and Orgrim cheered as he saw the good, natural lighting beat back that blue field. He swung again, and this time the Doomhammer crunched down on the blueskin's skull most satisfactorily.
It was all but over now. Only two remained standing, and in a heartbeat they had fallen beneath a mass of armored brown bodies.
A few more shouts and grunts and the unmistakable sound of bladed weapons sinking into flesh, and then all was silent.
The cornered clefthoof had escaped.
Orgrim caught his breath, his blood singing in his cars, aflame with the excitement of the kill. He had always enjoyed the hunts, but this ... he had never experienced anything like this. Sometimes the beasts he attacked fought back, but prey such as the draenei-intelligent, powerful, who fought in the same way he did and not with tooth and claw-was new to him. He threw back his head and laughed, and wondered if somehow he had become drunk on the sensation.
The cheers and rough, deep bellows of laughter from the victorious ores were the only sound in the glade. Blackhand strode to Orgrim and embraced him as best he could through the armor they both wore.
"I saw the Doomhammer, but it was so fast it was only a blur to my eyes," the Blackrock chieftain rumbled, grinning. "You fought well today, Orgrim. I was wise to name you my second." He stooped over the mage that had been Orgrim's last kill and removed his mailed gloves. The skull had been completely shattered, and blue blood was everywhere. Blackhand dipped his fingers in the slain draenei's life-fluid and carefully painted Orgrim's face with it. Deep inside, something shifted in the ore. He remembered doing this himself at his first kill, the blood red and warm; he remembered having this done to him when he went to the sacred mountain as part of the Om 'riggor ritual, with his father's blood on his face. And now, his leader had anointed him again, with the blood of the beings that were their enemy.
A bit of the dark blue liquid trickled down his check into the corner of his mouth. Orgrim extended his tongue, tasted the fluid, and found it sweet.
The bloodhawk settled on its master's arm, its talons digging deep into the protective leather. Ner'zhul paced while the hawkmastcr unrolled the message and delivered it to him. Quickly, he scanned the small piece of parchment.
So easy. It had been so easy. Not a single casualty, although some had been injured, of course. Their first foray and the ores had been completely victorious. Blackhand spoke contemptuously of how swiftly they had descended upon the party and broken their skulls. It was all unfolding as
Rulkan had promised him. Surely, surely now the being with whom Rulkan had allied would appear.
The orcs,led by Ner'zhul,
had certainly proven their worth with this decisive triumph.
He again read the missive. Blackhand and the Blackrock ores had indeed been the right choice to send against the draenei. They were powerful and violent, but unlike the Warsong or some other clans, they were completely under the control of their chieftain.
That night, he had a victory feast prepared for the Shadowmoon clan, and they ate and drank and laughed and sang until at last Ner'zhul trundled to his bed and fell into a deep, profound sleep.
And the being came.
It was glorious, radiant, so bright that even with his vision-eyes Ner'zhul could not bear to look upon it at first. He fell to his knees, shaking with the joy and awe that washed through him.
"You have come," he whispered, feeling tears well up in his eyes and slip down his face. "I knew that if we pleased you, you would come."
"Indeed you have, Ner'zhul, shaman, soul-tender of the ores." The voice rumbled through his bones and Ner'zhul closed his eyes, almost giddy at the sensation. "I have seen your masterful handling of your people, how you brought disparate clans together with a common purpose, a glorious goal."
"One that was inspired by you. Great One," murmured Ner'zhul. He thought of Rulkan and briefly wondered why she was no longer appearing to him, then dismissed the thought of her. This great entity was far superior to even the shade of his beloved mate. Ner'zhul craved more words from this magnificent being,
"You came to us and revealed the truth." Ner'zhul continued. "We did what
was needed."
"You did indeed, and ! am well pleased with you. Glory and honor and sweet victory will continue to be yours if you do as I say."
"Of course I will, but... Great One. this humble petitioner would beg a favor."
Ner'zhul risked a glance up at the being. It was enormous, radiant and red, with a powerful torso and legs that ended in cloven hooves and curved backward like a talbuk's. ..
... or a draenei's. . . .
Ncrzhul blinked. There was silence for a moment after he voiced his request and he thought he felt a sudden chill. Then the voice spoke again in his mind and in his cars, and it was still smooth and sweet as honey.
'Ask, and I will decide if you are worthy."
Suddenly Ner'zhul's mouth was dry and the words would not form. With an effort, he spoke. "Great One ... do you have a name by which we may call you-A chuckle rumbled through Ner'zhul's blood. "A simple favor, easily granted. Yes, I have a name. You may call me . , .
Kil'jaeden."
Nine
It is easy to understand why so many of my contemporaries prefer to let this history die. Let it sink into oblivion silently, slipping beneath the waters of time until the surface of the lake is once again unruffled, and no one knows of the shame lurking in the depths. I, too, feel that shame, though I was not alive when this occurred. I see it in Drek'Thar'sface as he recounts his part of the tale in a shaking voice. I saw the weight of it on Orgrim Doomhammer. Grom Helbcream, friend and traitor and friend again, was ravaged by it.
But to pretend it did not exist is to forget how dreadful the impact was. To make ourselves into victims, rather than claiming our participation in our own destruction. We chose this path, we ores. We chose it right up until it was too late to turn back. And having made that choice once, we can, with the knowledge that we have of the end of that dark and shameful road, choose not to take it.
So I wish to hear the testimony of those who placed one foot in front of the other on a road that spelled near obliteration of our kind. I want to understand why they took each step, what had to happen for it to seem logical and good and right.
I want to know this so when I see it unfolding again, I will recognize it.
Humatis have two sayings that are wise beyond imagining.
The first is, "Those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it."
And the second is . . . "Know your enemy."
Velen was deep in meditation when Restalaan reluctantly approached him. He sat in the central courtyard of the Temple of Karabor, not on the comfortable benches that flanked the rectangular pool, but on the hard stone.
The air was filled with the scent of the flowering bushes of the lush garden, and the water murmured softly as it circulated. Trees, their leaves moving in the wind, added their own quiet sounds. It was a tranquil scene, but Velen's attention was inward.
Long, long had the draenei and the Naaru trusted one another. The luminous beings who so seldom opted to take solid form had been first caretakers of the exiled eredar, then teachers, and then friends. They had traveled together and beheld many worlds.
Each time the Naaru, particularly the one that called itself K'ure, had been instrumental in helping the draenei flee when the man'ari uncovered their hiding place. And each time, Kil'jaeden and the monstrous creatures who had once been eredar had come closer
to capturing them. Velen grieved every time he and his people had to depart a world to save themselves, knowing that any beings they left behind would be as changed as the eredar had been. Kil'jaeden, always eager for more to join the Legion he was creating for his dark master Sargeras, would overlook no possible recruit.
K'ure, as sorrowful as Velen, grieved with him. But it spoke in Velen's mind with the unalterable logic that Kil'jaeden, Archimonde, and Sargeras would have destroyed another world in the same amount of time. All worlds, all beings, all races were horrifically equal in Sargeras's eyes. They all needed to be obliterated in a ghastly festival of carnage and fire, Velen's death at the hands of beings who had once been his dearest friends would save none of the luckless innocents, whereas his life possibly would one day.
"How?" Velen had raged once, "How is my life more important, worthier, than theirs?"
The gathering is slow, K'ure had admitted. But it continues. There are other Naaru like me, who are reaching out to the younger races. When they are ready, they will all be brought together. Sargeras will eventually fall beneath the will of those who yet believe in what is good and true and harmonious, what is the timeless balance of this universe.
Velen had no choice but to cither believe this being who had become his friend, or turn his back on those who had trusted him and be twisted into man'ari. He chose to believe. Now, though, he was confused. The ores had begun attacking lone hunting parties.
There seemed to be no reason for the aggression; none of the shaken guards to whom Velen had spoken reported anything out of the ordinary. And yet, three hunting parties had been killed down to the last draenei. Restalaan, who had investigated the slaughter, had reported that the bodies were not simply killed ... they were butchered.
So Velen had come to the temple, created in the earliest years of the draenei on this world. Here, surrounded by four of the seven ata'mal crystals that had sprung into being so very long ago, he could hear the faint voice of his friend in his mind, but as yet, K'ure had no answers for him.
There would be no flight for them this time if things went wrong. K'ure was dying, trapped in the very vessel that it had provided when it had crashed into this world two hundred years past.
"Great Prophet," said Restalaan, his voice soft and weary-sounding. "There has been another attack."
Slowly, Velen opened his ancient eyes and regarded his friend sorrowfully. "I know," he said. "I felt it."
Restalaan ran a thick-fingered hand through his black hair. "What do We do? Each attack seems more violent than the last.
Examination of the injuries done to the bodies seems to indicate that they are improving their weapons."
Velen sighed deeply and shook his head. The white braids swung gently with the movement. "I cannot
hear K'ure," he said quietly. "At least, not as well as I used to. I fear its time
is not much longer."
Restalaan lowered his gaze, pain evident on his face. The Naaru had effectively sacrificed itself for them; all the draenei knew and understood this. Strange and mysterious as the being was, the draenei had grown to care for it. It had been trapped and slowly dying for two centuries. Somehow, Velen had thought it would take longer than that for the being to die ... if it did die, as he understood such things.
He rose with purpose, his light tan robes fluttering behind him. "It yet has wisdom to impart to me, but I have not the skill to hear it anymore. I must go to it. Perhaps proximity will help it communicate better."
"You-you mean to go to the ship?" Restalaan asked.
Velen nodded. "I must."
"Great Prophet ... I do not mean to question your wisdom, but-"
"But you do anyway," Velen said, laughing, his startling blue eyes crinkling at the corners with genuine good humor. "Continue, my old friend. Your questioning always has value to me."
Restalaan sighed. "The ores have adopted the vessel as their sacred mountain," he said.
"I know this," Velen replied.
"Then why antagonize them by venturing there?" Restalaan asked. "They would surely see this as an act of aggression at any time, particularly now. You would be giving them a reason to continue their attacks against us."
Velen nodded. "I have thought of this. Thought long and hard on it. But perhaps it is time to reveal who we are, and what their sacred mountain is. They believe their ancestors dwell there; and they may very well be right. If K'ure does not have much longer, should we not utilize its wisdom and its powers while we can? If anyone or anything can broker peace between the
ores and ourselves, this being, greater far than any of us, has that ability. This may be our only hope. K'ure spoke of finding other races, other beings, to join in its quest for balance and harmony. To stand against Sargeras and this vast, unholy force he has created."
Velen placed a white hand on his friend's armor-plated shoulder. "One thing for certain has been revealed to me in my meditations. And that is that things can no longer continue as they used to. orc and draenei can no longer live in distant familiarity with one another. There's no returning to that, my old friend. There is cither war or peace. They will cither become our allies or our enemies. And I would never forgive myself if I did not explore every avenue to peace I could. Do you understand now?"
Restalaan searched Velen's face unhappily, then nodded. "Yes. Yes, I suppose I do. But I like it not. At least let me send you with an armored guard, for I know they will attack before they will listen."
Velen shook his head. "No. No weapons. Nothing to
provoke them. In their hearts, they are honorable beings. I was able to glimpse the souls of the two young orcs who stayed with us a few years ago. There is nothing cowardly or evil in there, only caution and now, for some reason, fear. They attacked hunting parties, not civilians."
"Yes," Restalaan shot back. "Parties that were greatly outnumbered."
"We found blood that was not our own spilled at those sites," Velen reminded him. "They took the bodies back for ritual burning, but there was orcish blood enough on the soil. And with our knowledge, a handful of draenei can easily stand against many ores.
No. I will risk all on this. They will not slay me where I stand, if I state my intentions honorably and I come without the blatant ability to defend myself."
"I wish I had your confidence, my Prophet," said Restalaan resignedly, bowing deeply. "I will assemble a small escort party, then.
And they will not be armed."
The Great One, Kil'jaeden, began to visit Ner'zhul with more frequency. First it was only in the dream state, as with the ancestors.
He would come in the night while Ner'zhul slept deeply, his body heavy with the drug that opened his mind to Kil'jaeden's voice, and whisper his praise and congratulations and plans for further orc victory.
Ner'zhul was in ecstasy. Each letter that arrived by bloodhawk from the various clans was read with eagerness and delight. We came across two scouts far from aid, the Shattered Hand clan chieftain wrote. It was ease itself to dispatch them, outnumbered as they were.
The Bleeding Hollow clan is proud to report to the great Ner'zhul that we have obeyed him in all things, said another letter. We have joined with the Laughing Skull clan, more than doubling the number of armed warriors to send against this devious foe. It is our understanding that the Thunderlord clan seeks allies. We will send a courier to them tomorrow.
"Yes." smiled Kil'jaeden. "Do you see how they are coming together in a just cause? Before, these clans would be challenging one another if they crossed paths. Now. they are sharing knowledge, sharing resources, working as one to overcome a foe who would see you all destroyed."
Ner'zhul nodded, but he felt a sudden pang. It had been glorious to finally behold this beautiful, powerful entity, despite the fact that he looked so much like the hated draenei, but ... he had stopped seeing Rulkan. He found he missed her. He wondered why she was no longer seeking him out.
Hesitantly, he spoke. "Rulkan-"
"Rulkan has done her part in bringing you to me, Ner'zhul." soothed Kil'jaeden. "You know she is well and happy-you have seen her. We do not need her as an intermediary anymore. Not now that I have been convinced of your worthiness to be my voice among your people."
And as before, Ner'zhul's heart flooded with joy. But this time, despite the comforting and exciting words of Kil'jaeden, he felt a sad little jerk in his heart as it beat, and still wished he could speak with his mate.
Ner'zhul was deep in thought when Gul'dan brought the missive to him. The apprentice bowed and handed his master a piece of parchment, stiff with blue liquid.
"What is this?" Ner'zhul asked, taking the parchment.
"It was taken off a draenei approaching from the south," Gul'dan replied.
"A party?"
"A single courier. No arms, not even a mount. The fool was walking." Gul'dan's lips twisted into a smile and he chuckled.
Ner'zhul looked down at the parchment, realizing now that the blue stains were the courier's blood. What had possessed the idiot, walking alone, unarmed, into the heart of Shadowmoon territory?
He unfolded it carefully, trying not to tear it. and quickly began to read. Even as his brown eyes darted over the words, the room was suddenly filled with radiance and both shaman prostrated themselves.
"Read it aloud, great Ner'zhul," came Kil'jaeden's smooth voice. "Share it with me and your loyal apprentice."
"Yes. please, my master," said Gul'dan eagerly.
As he read it, for the first time since he had spoken with his beloved Rulkan, Ner'zhul tasted doubt- Unto Ner'zhul, Shaman, of the Shadowmoon clan, the Prophet Velen of the draenei sends greetings.
Recently, many of our people have come under attack from the ores. I do not understand wiry this is. For generations, your people and mine have lived in peace and tolerance, a state that has benefitted us both. We have never lifted
a weapon toward an ore, and indeed, once we were instrumental in saving the lives of two young ones who unwittingly placed themselves in danger.
"Ah," Gul'dan interrupted. "I remember . . . Durotan. who is currently the Frostwolf chieftain, and Orgrim Doomhammer."
Ner'zhul nodded absently, his thoughts distracted for a moment, then resumed reading.
We can only assume there is a terrible misunderstanding, and wish to speak with you so that no more lives- ore or draenei- are lost in such a tragic fashion.
It is my understanding that the mountain you call Oshu'gun is sacred to your people, that this is where the wise spirits of your ancestors dwell. While this place has long had deep meaning for the draenei as well, we have always respected your decision to claim it as your holy site. However, the time has come for us to recognize that there is more that we share than that divides us. I am called the Prophet among my people,
because at times I am granted wisdom and insight. I seek to lead well and peacefully, as I am sure you and the leaders of the various clans do your own people.
Let us meet peaceably, at the place that holds so much meaning for both our races. On the third day of the fifth month, I and a small party will be moving in pilgrimage to enter the heart of the mountain. No one in the group will bear arms. I invite you and any others who feel so moved to join me, as we enter the deep place of magic and power, and ask the wisdom of beings much wiser than we how we can heal this rift between us.
In Light and blessings, I bid you peace.
Gul'dan was the first to speak. Or. more accurately, to laugh.
"Such arrogance! My lord, great Kil'jaeden, this is an opportunity not to be missed. Their leader comes like a clefthoof calf to the slaughter, unarmed and
stupidly thinking that we know nothing of his evil intentions. And he thinks to violate Oshu'gun! He will die before he sets a vile blue hoof upon even the root of our holy mountain!"
"What you say pleases me, Gul'dan," Kil'jaeden rumbled in that smooth-aswater voice. "Ner'zhul, your apprentice speaks wisdom."
But Ner'zhul found words stuck in his throat. He opened his mouth twice to speak, and finally words rasped forth on the third attempt. "I do not disagree that the draenei are dangerous," he said haltingly, "But. . . we are not gronn, to kill unarmed foes."
"The courier was slain," Gul'dan pointed out. "He was unarmed and even unmounted."
"And I regret that!" Ner'zhul snapped. "He should have been taken into custody and brought to me at once, not killed!"
Kil'jaeden said nothing. The scarlet radiance bathed Ner'zhul as he continued, groping his way to a solution.
"He will not be permitted to defile our sacred place," the shaman continued. "Have no worries about that, Gul'dan. But I will not have him killed without having the chance to speak to him. Who knows but that we might learn something."
"Yes," said Kil'jaeden, his voice rich and warm. "When one is in pain, one will reveal all he knows."
The words starded Ner'zhul, but he did not reveal his surprise. This magnificent being wanted him to torture Velen? Something inside him was excited at the prospect. But something else inside him recoiled. Not yet. He would not do such a thing yet.
"We will be waiting for him," he assured both his great lord and his apprentice. "He will not escape."
"Lord," said Gul'dan slowly, "a suggestion, if I may?"
"What is it?"
"The closest clan to the mountain is the Frostwolf clan," Gul'dan pointed out. "Let us have them take
Velen and his party and bring diem to us. Their leader once tasted draenei hospitality. And although he has not hindered our efforts, I do not recall hearing that he has led any attacks against the draenei. We shall kill two birds with one stone: take the draenei leader captive, and make Durotan of the Frostwolves prove his loyalty to our cause."
Ner'zhul felt two pairs of eyes boring into his-die small, dark ones of his apprentice, and the glowing orbs of his master Kil'jaeden. What Gul'dan had suggested sounded like wisdom. Then why was Ner'zhul so reluctant to agree?
The heartbeats ticked away and perspiration sprouted on Ner'zhul's low brow. Finally, he spoke, and was relieved to hear his voice sounded sure and strong.
"Agreed. It is a good plan. Find me pen and parchment, and I shall notify Durotan as to his duty."
Ten
I have never been so proud of my father as when Drek'Thar told me of this incident. I have good cause to know how hard it is to make the right decision at times. He had much to lose and nothing to gain by making the choices he did.
No, that is not right.
He retained his honor. And there can be no price high enough to sacrifice that.
The letter brooked no disagreement. Durotan stared at it, and then with a deep sigh passed it to his mate. Draka read it quickly, her eyes darting over the words, and growled soft and low in her throat.
"Ner'zhul is cowardly, to lay this at your feet," she said softly, so as not to be overheard by the courier who waited outside. "The request comes to him, not you."
"I have promised to obey." Durotan said, his voice equally soft, "Ner'zhul speaks for the ancestors."
Draka cocked her head thoughtfully. A stray beam of sunlight penetrating the tent from a gap in the scams caught her face, throwing her strong jaw and high cheekbones into sharp relief. Durotan's breath caught in his throat as he looked at his beloved.
For ail the chaos-madness, even-that seemed to have suddenly descended upon himself and his people, he was grateful for her.
He touched her brown face lightly with a sharp-clawed finger, and she smiled briefly
"My mate ... I do not know that I trust Ner'zhul," she said, her voice barely
above a whisper. He nodded. "But we both trust Drek'Thar, and he has confirmed what Ner'zhul has said. The draenei have been plotting against us. Ner'zhul says that Velen has even insisted on entering Oshu'gun."
Again, the chieftain of the Frostwolf clan regarded the letter. "I am pleased that Ner'zhul has not asked me to slay Velen. Perhaps, once we have him in our power, we can convince him to change his ways, have him explain why they are so bent on harming us.
Perhaps we can negotiate a peace."
The thought seized his heart and squeezed it hard. As glorious as his life with Draka was. as proud as he was of his clan, how much happier would he be simply doing as his father had done-hunting the beasts of the woods and fields, dancing in the moonlight at Kosh'harg festivals, listening to the old tales and basking in the loving warmth of the ancestors. He had not said anything to Draka, but he was secretly glad that they had not yet conceived a child. This was not a time that was easy on the young ores. Their childhood had been stolen from them; adult duties had been placed on shoulders still not quite broad enough to bear them. If Draka were to bear a child. Durotan would not hesitate to have his son or daughter trained as other children were. He would ask nothing of other parents that he would not do himself, but he was glad that he was not faced with that decision quite yet.
Draka watched him with intense, narrowed eyes. It was as if she could read his thoughts.
"You have met Velen before," she said. "I watched you try to reconcile your memories of that encounter with the news that they were trying to destroy us all. It was not easy for you."
"Nor is it now," he replied. "Perhaps it is just as well that I am assigned this task. Velen will remember that night, of that I am certain. He may be willing to treat with me, whereas he might not be so willing to treat with Ner'zhul. I wish I had seen the letter he had sent."
Draka sighed and got to her feet. "I think that would have been most enlightening," she said.
Durotan emulated her. "I will tell the courier that his master may rest content. I will not shirk my duty."
He felt her worried gaze boring into his back as he left.
Velen held the violet crystal close to his heart. The red and yellow ones rested at his side as he sat in meditation, casting a soft glow upon his alabaster skin. The four others were placed elsewhere in draenei territory, their great powers serving his people as needed. But the violet one never left him.
Its power opened the mind and spirit, and in a way, it was almost like being in direct communication with the Naaru. Velen always felt stronger, cleaner, his soul honed to a keen edge, when he meditated with the violet crystal. Although each of the seven crystals was precious and powerful, this was the one he treasured the most.
He strained to hear the soft whispers of K'ure. but he could not. Velen's heart ached. He bowed his head.
He heard voices and opened his eyes. Restalaan was speaking to one of the acolytes, and Velen waved him forward.
"What news, old friend?" Velen inquired. He indicated a pot of hot herbal tea.
Restalaan waved his hand, declining the offer. "Good and bad. my Prophet," he said. "I deeply regret to inform you that the courier you sent to the shaman leader Ner'zhul was killed by a group of ores."
Velen closed his eyes. The violet crystal grew warmer for a moment, as if trying to offer comfort.
"I sensed his death," Velen said heavily. "But I had hoped it was an accident. You are certain he was murdered?"
"Ner'zhul says so. and offers no apology." Restalaan's voice conveyed his anger and affront at the incident. He was kneeling beside Velen, next to the red crystal. Velen's dark blue eyes darted to the crystal as it pulsed once, briefly, responding to Restalaan's emotions.
"So much for your theory that they would not attack an unarmed man," Restalaan continued bitterly.
"I had so hoped for better," Velen said quietly. "But you said there was some good news to mitigate these sad tidings?"
Restalaan grimaced. "If you can call it that. Ner'zhul says that an orc contingency will meet with us at the base of the mountain."
"He ... is not coming?"
Restalaan dropped his gaze and shook his head. "No, my Prophet," he said quietly.
"Who docs he send in his stead?"
"The letter docs not say."
"Give it to me." Velen stretched out a white hand and Restalaan placed the parchment in his palm. Velen uncurled the parchment and read the letter quickly.
Your courier is dead. It is fortunate that those who slew him thought to search the body for his missive. I have read it, and I will agree to send a contingency of ores to speak with you. I guarantee nothing- not your safety, not a truce, nothing. But we will hear you out.
Velen sighed deeply. This was not the response his soul had longed for. What had happened to the ores?
Why in this world or any other were they suddenly so bent on harming the draenei, who had never opposed them in any fashion?
I guarantee nothing, Ner'zhul had said, writing in a strong, bold hand.
"Very well," said Velen quietly. "Then nothing is guaranteed," He smiled at Restalaan. "Rather like life."
The day was inappropriately bright and cheerful, Durotan thought, squinting against the bright early summer light that danced down. Surely, on a day when his soul felt so bleak and unhappy, the weather ought to reflect it. Clouds, at the very least. More appropriately, a cold, drizzling rain. But the sun did not care about an ore's heavy hcait, or even the fate of an entire race of people. It shone down as merrily as if all was right every place its rays touched. Oshu'gun almost seemed to be on fire, so bright was the light that reflected off its multifaceted, crystalline surface.
Durotan had chosen a position of strength. From where he had positioned his warriors, he would be able to see Velen's traveling party long before they spotted the ores. He had decided to wait and let the Prophet of the draenei come directly to him, although he had strategically positioned his warriors so that if the draenei attempted to flee, no avenue of flight would be open to them. And all the ores who waited patiently on this offensively glorious day were armed to the teeth, with shaman at the ready. With her sharp eyes and superb fighting skills, Draka was highly useful to him as a scout. He had positioned her as one of the lookouts in the first group of warriors. The instant that Velen was visible, she would send word to her mate via a spell cast by Drek'Thar.
Drek'Thar himself, though, was standing beside Durotan, As the most powerful shaman in the clan, his place was to protect the clan's leader. The two stood on a rock outcropping just above the entrance to the gleaming sacred mountain. Dozens of warriors waited with arrows, hand axes, and javelins at the ready. Others had spent days maneuvering large boulders into position. At a word from Durotan, a simple movement would send death in the form of huge stones crashing down upon the draenei.
The threat of death, in fact, was everywhere on this lovely mountain, on this beautiful sunny day.
A breeze stirred Durotan's black hair and a bird sang brightly. Drek'Thar looked at his chieftain with concern.
"My chieftain, you are doing what you have been told to do," Drek'Thar said earnestly. "These beings are our enemies."
Durotan nodded and wished he could believe it as easily as every other orc seemed to.
The breeze brushed his check again, more insistently, and this time he heard words on the wind. Draka's message, borne to him by Drek'Thar's bond with the elements. They are coming. Five of them. None of
them is wearing armor or carries any visible weapons. They walk serenely.
The wind wafted her words away, and he knew it went to touch the cars of all the ores assembled. When the time was right, Drek'Thar would harness the wind to give orders to Durotan's troops. Durotan straightened, and his heart beat more swiftly. His hand gripped his battle-axe tightly.
"There they are," said Drek'Thar grimly. Durotan followed his gaze.
Draka's report had been accurate, right down to her interpretation of the manner in which the draenei approached. The five draenei did not wear the strange blue and silvery armor that Durotan remembered from his single encounter with them. They were dressed instead as they had been for the meal, in robes of beautiful hues that caught the breeze and fluttered behind them like banners.
Walking at the very front of the little group was Prophet Velen himself. He was unmistakable; his simple tan robes contrasted with those of his entourage, and of course his strange white skin was unique. Durotan grinned a little despite the dircness of the situation. The draenei were so garishly clad that only a blind orc would have failed to spot them from a great distance.
The smile faded at what that had to represent. They wanted to be spotted immediately. They wanted the ores to be confident that they carried no
weapons and were on what Mother Kashur would have called a pilgrimage. Or was it all just an elaborate trick?
Shaman needed no spears to destroy. Neither did the draenei. Durotan remembered the magical nets that scared and blackened flesh on contact- nets of energy, alien to the orcs, that had come from nowhere.
No, even unarmed, the draenei were far from harmless.
He had briefed his warriors and knew they would obey. They understood they were not to fire a warning shot-not to utter even an insult-without Durotan's express command. But they knew how the draenei fought, and would not be taken unawares.
Durotan could smell the tension emanating from those warriors closest to him; he wondered if the draenei could, too.
Durotan watched as the groups he had set farthest away came out of hiding to close ranks behind the draenei. They were far enough back so that Durotan hoped the draenei would not notice. If they did, they gave no sign, but merely continued with that steady, confident... serene . . . pace.
Durotan and Drek'Thar made no attempt to disguise themselves. After several long minutes, Velen lifted his head and looked up, right into Durotan's eyes. Durotan did not break the gaze, but stood waiting for his enemies to continue their approach. They reached the base of the mountain, but before they could continue farther, dozens of ores moved purposefully out of hiding to surround them.
Velen did not look in the least bit surprised. He glanced around, smiling a little, and then returned his gaze to Durotan. Slowly, Durotan descended until he stood face-to-face with the draenei prophet.
"Long has it been since you and I last stood so, Velen," Durotan said in a calm voice. He deliberately did not use the draenei's title.
"Long indeed, Durotan, son of Garad, chieftain of the Frostwolf clan," Velen
said in that rich, smooth voice that Durotan remembered. "Are you friends with Orgrim still?"
"Indeed I am," Durotan replied. "He carries the Doomhammer now, and is second in his own clan."
Sorrow flitted across the pale face, a sorrow that was deep and unquestionably genuine. Again, Durotan remembered that night so long ago, when this being had sat with them and talked of orcish ways, of the Doomhammer and the cost at which Orgrim would buy it.
"I hope his father and yours passed with great honor," Velen said.
"We are not here today to speak of the past," Durotan said, more forcefully than he intended. He did not like to remember that night. "We are here because you have informed us that you dare trespass on our most sacred place."
There it is, then, he thought. Let us not mince words.
Velen held Durotan's gaze and nodded. "I had sent a missive to Ner'zhul, not to you, Durotan. He has dcclincd to meet with mc. I wonder . . . did he share this missive with you?"
"There was no need for me to read it." Durotan replied, "I was asked to come in his stead. And I have done so."
Durotan saw the broad shoulders slump a little. Velen sighed deeply. "I sec," he said. "He may not have told you why I wished to come today."
"I do not need to know your purpose, draenei," Durotan said.
"But you do. or else this conversation will be for nothing." The voice was clear and crisp, and there was nothing old or frail about it despite Velen's obviously ancient age. Durotan raised an eyebrow. That Velen was a wise elder was immediately apparent. But now, for the first time. Durotan caught a glimpse of the sheer strength of will that had buoyed Velen for coundess
years.
"This this mountain is sacred to your people. We know this, and we have respected it. But it is also sacred to us." Velen took a step forward, his gaze locked on Durotan's. The orc warriors around him shifted, murmured, but otherwise did not move.
"Deep inside the mountain is a being that has long cared for the draenei people," Velen continued. "It is older by far than anything cither of our minds can grasp. And more powerful. But even old and powerful things can die, and it is dying now. There is wisdom and grace and reconciliation We can have from it. your people and mine. We-"
"Blasphemer!"
Durotan started. The bitter cry had sprung from the throat not of some shorttempered warrior in the crowd, but from the orc who stood beside him. Drek'Thar's eyes were wide and his body trembled with outrage. Veins stood out on his neck and he shook his fist at Velen. Durotan was so shocked by the outburst that he did not silence it as quickly as he should have, and Drek'Thar continued.
"Oshu'gun belongs to us! It is the home of the beloved dead, cradlcr of their spirits, and your hideous cloven feet are not fit to take one step up its blessed sides!"
Velen. too. seemed surprised at the outburst. He turned his attention to the shaman and stretched out a hand imploringly.
"Your sprits are housed within these walls, it is true, and I would never say it was not so." Velen cried. "But they are drawn there because of this being. It seeks to-"
It was exactly the wrong thing to say. Drek'Thar bellowed in outrage. Other cries went up, and before Durotan realized quite what was happening, he saw his warriors surge forward. Draka moved toward them, trying to stop the attack, but she might as well have been trying to hold back the incoming tide.
Durotan spun and struck Drek'Thar hard across the face. The shaman whirled, snarling. "Protect them!" Durotan cried. "You will obey my orders, and we must take them alive. Protect them, curse you!"
Drek'Thar's eyes flashed in fury, but only for an instant. He lifted his hands and closed his eyes, and suddenly a huge circle of flame sprang up around the five draenei. A wind sprang up, whipping the fire even higher and physically buffeting the ores. The warriors stepped back, and to Durotan's horror some of the archers began nocking arrows on their bowstrings.
"Hold!" bellowed Durotan, the wind taking his order and bearing it to his warriors' cars. "I will slay anyone who fires!"
Between his command and Drek'Thar's powerful, if reluctant, abilities, the draenei were unharmed. Durotan raced down the mountainside to his prisoners, for such they now were. Drek'Thar was at his heels.
"Dismiss fire," Durotan told Drek'Thar. At once, the sheets of flame that almost singed Durotan's eyebrows dissipated. He stood face-to-face now with Velen, and a wave of an emotion he could not properly name rose inside him as he realized that the draenei elder was still as calm and serene as he had been when they had simply been talking.
"Velen, you and your people are now prisoners of the Frostwolf clan," Durotan said in a soft, dangerous voice.
Velen smiled, sweetly, sadly. "I expected nothing less." he said.
He and the other four somehow maintained their composure while Durotan ordered them stripped and searched. Their glorious robes were taken and given to Durotan's top warriors, and the draenei were clad now in sweat-stiff tunics. His stomach turned at the jeers, insults, and spits that came their way at the humiliation, but he did not stop it. As long as no physical harm came to the prisoners-and Durotan watched closely to ensure that none would-he would let his warriors have their sport. Beside him, Draka looked angry at the behavior of her fellow Frostwolves and whispered, "My mate, can you not silence them?"
He shook his head. "I want to see how the draenei react. And . . . the warriors have stayed their hands when they might have been expected to kill. I will not silence their tongues as well."
Draka looked at him searchingly, then nodded and withdrew. He knew she did not approve, and he did not like what he was seeing cither. But he was walking a delicate line, and he knew it.
"My chieftain!" cried Rokkar, Durotan's second in command. "Come see what they have brought us!"
Durotan went to Rokkar's side and peered into the sack he had opened. His eyes widened. Nestled inside, swathed in soft fabric, were two exquisitely beautiful stones. One was red, the other was yellow. Durotan ached to touch them, but did not. He looked up and met Velen's gaze. "Long ago, Restalaan showed us a crystal similar to this one," he said. "That one protected a city. What do these do?"
"Each has its own strength. They are part of our legacy. They were bequeathed to us by the being that dwells in the sacred mountain."
Durotan growled softly. "You would do well not to mention that again," he said. To Rokkar, he said, "Feed them, bind their hands, and put them on wolves, with shaman to guard them. Give the stones to Drek'Thar. We will take the draenei back with us and deliver them to Ner'zhul. He should have been here in my stead today."
He turned and stalked off, not wanting to look at Velen's odd, glowing blue eyes, not wanting to see the disapproval in Draka's.
During the long ride back, Durotan wrestled with his emotions. On the one hand, he shared Drek'Thar's offense. Oshu'gun was sacred to the ores. The idea that something other than the ancestors dwelt inside it, indeed, as Velen claimed, was so powerful that it lured the ancestors to it, struck him to the core. He could only imagine how the shaman felt about such a declaration. Everything seemed to point to Ner'zhul's being correct, that the draenei were a blight upon the world and should be eliminated.
What nagged at him was why. He would get an answer to that question tonight.
With everyone, including the five captives, mounted, they made good time. The sun was only starting to set when they returned.
Durotan had sent outriders ahead with the good news, and the clan was waiting eagerly for their arrival. On his right were Drek'Thar and Rokkar, who shared the sentiments of the Frostwolves. On his left was Draka, who had been uncharacteristically silent throughout the entire event. Durotan knew that he did not want to hear what she had to say; he was already being pulled in too many directions as it was.
The prisoners were ungraciously shoved into two tents and an immediate guard was set up around them. Four seasoned warriors and Drek'Thar's most trusted shaman stood proudly, pleased with the duty entrusted to them. Durotan had ordered Velen isolated; he wanted to speak with the draenei prophet alone.
After the excitement had settled down somewhat, Durotan took a deep breath. He was not looking forward to this conversation, but it had to be done. He nodded to the guards and entered the small tent that hosted Prophet Velen.
Since he had ordered Velen bound, he expected to see the elder with his hands tied. Instead, he saw that whoever had carried out his order had done so with excessive zeal.
The tent had been erected around a sturdy tree, and Velen was now bound to the trunk. His arms had been yanked back at an awkward angle, the ropes around the white flesh of his wrists tied so tightly that even in the dim light of twilight Durotan could see that they were turning a darker shade. A rope tied, thankfully loosely, around his neck forced him to keep his head up or risk choking. A diity cloth had been shoved in his mouth. He was on his knees, and his hooves, too, were bound behind him.
Durotan uttered a deep oath and drew a dagger. Velen gazed at him with no sign of fear in those deep blue eyes, but Durotan did notice that the draenei
looked surprised when the orc used the weapon to cut the bonds rather than his throat. Velen made no sound, but a flicker of pain passed over his ghostly white face as blood returned to his limbs.
"I told them to bind you, not truss you up like a talbuk," Durotan muttered.
"Your people are very eager, it would seem."
Durotan passed the elder a watcrskin and watched him closely while he drank. Sitting before him in filthy clothing, gulping at tepid water, his white flesh raw from the bonds, Velen did not look like much of a threat. How would he feel, he wondered, if he had gotten word of the draenei treating Mother Kashur so? Everything about this felt wrong. Yet Mother Kashur herself had assured Drek'Thar that the draenei were a threat so dire as to be almost unimaginable.
There was a bowl of cold blood porridge on the ground. With his right foot, Durotan shoved it toward the prisoner. Velen eyed it, but did not cat.
"Not quite the feast you served Orgrim and me when we dined in Telmor," Durotan said. "But it is nourishing."
Velen's lips curved in a smile. "That was a memorable evening."
"Did you get what you wanted from us that night?" Durotan demanded. He was angry, but not with Velen. He was angry that it had come to this, that one who had shown him nothing but courtesy was now his captive. And so he took it out on the Prophet.
"I do not understand. We merely wished to be good hosts to two adventuresome boys."
Durotan got to his feet and kicked over the bowl. Congealed porridge oozed onto the earth. "Do you expect me to believe this?"
Velen did not rise to the bait. He replied calmly, "It is the truth. It is your choice as to whether you believe it."
Durotan dropped to his knees and shoved his face into Velen's. "Why are you trying to destroy us? What have we ever done to you?"
"I might ask you the same question," said Velen. A flush had come to his white face. "We have never lifted a finger to harm you, and now over two dozen draenei are dead from your attacks!"
The truth of the comment made Durotan even angrier. "The ancestors do not lie to us," he snarled. "We have been warned that you are not what you would seem-that you are our enemies. Why did you bring those crystals if not to attack us?" "We thought it might help us better communicate with the being in the mountain." Velen spoke quickly, as if trying to get the words out before Durotan could silence him. "It is not an enemy to the orcs,nor are We. Durotan, you are intelligent and wise. I saw this in you that night so long ago. You are not one to blindly follow like an animal to slaughter. I know not why your leaders lie to you, but they do. We have ever sought to interact peaceably with you. You are better than this, son of Gar .id. You are not like the others!"
Durotan's dark brown eyes narrowed. "You are wrong, draenei," he spat. "I am proud to be an ore. I embrace my heritage."
Velen looked exasperated. "You misunderstand. I do not malign your people. I merely-■
"Merely what? Merely tell us that the only reason We are seeing the beloved dead is because of your . . . your god trapped in the mountain?"
"It is not a god, it is an ally, and would be one to your people as well if you would permit it to be."
Durotan swore and rose, stalking about the tent, his hands clenching and unclenching. Then he uttered a long, deep sigh, the anger in him burning down to ashes.
"Velen, your words are but wood on the fire of our wrath," he said quietly. "Your claim is arrogant and offensive. It will support those who are already
prepared to slay your people on the word oi our ancestors. I do not understand myself-but you are asking to choose
between people I trust, traditions I have been raised on, and your word."
He turned and faced the draenei. "I will choose my people. You need to know this. If you and I come face-to-face on the field of battle, I will not stay my hand."
Velen looked only curious. "You .. . will not take me to Ner'zhul, then?"
Durotan shook his head. "No. If he wanted you, he should have come for you himself. He appointed me to treat with you, and I have carried out my duties as I saw fit."
"You were supposed to deliver a prisoner to him," Velen said.
"I was to meet with you and listen to your words," Durotan said. "Had I captured you in battle, stricken a weapon from your hands, and wrested you to the earth, then yes, you would be a prisoner. But there is no honor in binding a foe who extends his hands willingly for the rope. We are at an impasse, you and I. You insist that you have no ill will toward the ores. My leaders and the ghosts of my ancestors tell me otherwise."
Again, Durotan knelt before the draenei. "They call you Prophet-do you know the future then? If so, then tell me what you and I can do to avert what I fear will unfold. I would not shed innocent life, Velen. Give me something, anything, I can take to Ner'zhul that will prove that what you say is true!"
He realized he was pleading, but the fact did not distress him. He loved his wife, his clan, his people. He hated what he was seeing: an entire generation rushing headlong to adulthood with only blind hate in their hearts. If begging before this strange being could change this, then beg he would.
The strange blue eyes held an unspeakable empathy. Velen extended a pale hand and placed it on Durotan's shoulder.
"The future is not like a book one can read," he said quietly. "It is ever changing, like the rush of water, or the swirl of sand. I am granted certain insights, but nothing more, I felt very strongly that I needed to come unarmed, and behold, I am greeted not by the ores' greatest shaman, but by one who has slept safely under my roof. I do not think this an accident. Durotan. And if anything can be done to avert this, it lies with the orcs, not with the draenei. AH I can do is tell you what I have already said. The river's course can be changed. But you are the ones who must change it. That is all I know, and I pray it is enough to save my people."
The look on his ancient, oddly cracked face and the tone of his voice told Durotan what his words did not: that Velen did not, indeed, think it would be enough to save his people.
Durotan closed his eyes for a moment, then stepped back. "We will keep the stones," he said. "Whatever power they have, the shaman will learn how to harness."
Velen nodded sadly "Such I assumed," he said. "But I had to bring them. I had to trust that we could find a way past all of this."
Why was it, Durotan wondered, that he felt closer at this moment to one he had been told was an enemy than to the spiritual leader of his own people? Draka might know. She had known all along. She had said nothing, understanding with a wisdom he could not comprehend that he had to come to this moment on his own. But he would speak to her tonight, alone in their tent.
"Get up." he said, speaking roughly to hide his emotions, "You and your companions may leave safely." He grinned suddenly. "As safely as you might, in the darkness, with no weapons. If you come to your deaths this night when you are past our territory, it will not be on my head."
"That would be convenient for you," agreed Velen, getting to his feet. "But somehow. I think it is not what you want."
Durotan did not reply. He marched out of the tent and told the waiting
guards. "Velen and his four companions are to be safely escorted to the borders of our lands. Then, they will be released, to return to then-city. No harm is to befall them, is that clear?"
The guard looked as if he was about to protest, but another, wiser warrior shot him a fierce glance.
"Very clear, my chieftain," the first guard murmured. As they went to fetch the other draenei, Drek'Thar hurried up to Durotan.
"Durotan! What are you doing? Ner'zhul expects prisoners!" "Ner'zhul can take his prisoners himself," Durotan snarled. "I was in command, and this is my decision. Do you question it?"
Drek'Thar looked around and walked Durotan away from prying cars. "I do," he hissed. "You heard what he said! He claims the ancestors are-are like moths to a torch around this god of his! The arrogance! Ner'zhul is right. They must be eliminated. We have been told so!"
"if it is to be, then it will be," said Durotan. "But not this night, Drek'Thar. Not this night."
As he and his companions walked slowly over the dew-drenched grasses of die meadows, past the towering black silhouettes of the trees of Terokkar forest, toward the nearest city, Velen's heart was heavy.
Two of the ata'mal crystals were now in the possession of the ores. He had no doubt but that Durotan's words were correct, and that their shaman would shortly unlock their secrets. But they had missed one.
They had missed it because it did not wish to be found, and when it came to the crystals, light obeyed its wishes and bent itself so that the violet crystal remained hidden from the view of the searching ores. He held it close to his heart now, feeling its warmth seep into his ancient flesh.
He had gambled, and failed. Not completely; that he and his friends were alive and walking toward safety was testimony to that.
But he had hoped the ores
would listen, that they would at least accompany him into the heart of their own sacred mountain, and behold something that did not negate their faidi, not in the slightest, but had in fact given birth to it.
The oudook was grim. As he had walked into the camp, he had observed what was happening. Younglings were being trained so hard they were dropping from exhaustion. Forges were going even so late at night. For all that he was walking freely now, Velen knew that the incidents of today had done nothing to avert what would come. The orcs,even the ones led by the insightful, slow to anger Durotan, were not just preparing for the possibility of war. They were convinced of the certainty of it. When the sun showed her yellow head tomorrow morning, she would look upon the inevitable.
The crystal he held so close to his heart pulsed, sensing his thoughts. Velen turned to his companions and looked upon them sorrowfully.
"The ores will not be dissuaded from this path," he said. "And therefore, if we are to survive . . . we, too, must walk the path to war."
Far in the distance, broken, dying, resting as peacefully as possible deep below the waters of the sacred pool, the being known as K'ure uttered a deep, agonized cry.
Velen started, recognizing the voice, and bowed his head. The Frostwolf ores gasped at the sound and turned to regard the perfect triangle of Oshu'gun.
"The ancestors are angry with us!" a young shaman cried. "Angry for letting Velen go!"
Durotan shook his head. He ought to rebuke the youngster, and on the morrow, if such words were uttered again, he would. But now. his heart was full of sorrow. It was not a cry of anger that came from the sacred mountain. It was the wrenching sound of ultimate grief, and he shuddered inside as he wondered why the ancestors mourned so very, very deeply.
Eleven
Ner'zhul... Gul'dan. Two of the darkest names ever to sully the history of my people. And yet, Dreh'Thar tells me that once Ner'zhul was admired, even beloved, and truly cared for the people whose spiritual leader he was. It is hard to reconcile those words with what Ner'zhul has become, but I try. I try because I want to understand. And yet, try as I might... I do not.
"What?"
Ner'zhul's shriek of outrage made his apprentice Gul'dan wince, Durotan did not bat an eye.
"I released the Prophet Velen," the chieftain of the Frostwolf clan said calmly.
"Your orders were to take him and the others prisoner!" Ner'zhul's voice climbed with each word. It had been so plain, so easy.
What had Durotan been thinking? To toss away this opportunity like bones when the meat had been devoured! How much
information could they have extracted from Velen? What kind of bargaining power over the draenei would he have bought them?
But that thought was dwarfed by the overwhelming horror of how Kil'jaeden would react. What would he do when he learned that Velen had not been captured? The beautiful being had been seemingly well pleased at the prospect, when Ner'zhul told him of the plan. Flushed with pride at his cleverness, thinking victory already assured. Ner'zhul had even dared to offer Velen to Kil'jaeden as a sort of present. Now what would happen? The realization that he felt fear rather than chagrin at bringing disappointing news was not lost on the shaman.
"You put me in charge of the capture, and capture them I did," Durotan
replied. "But there is no honor in a prisoner taken willingly. You want us to be strong as a people, rather than as individual clans, and we cannot do that without a code of honor that is inviolable, that is-"
Durotan continued speaking in his gruff, deep voice, but Ner'zhul was no longer listening. At that instant, that frozen space in time. Ner'zhul had a sudden realization that Kil'jaeden might not be the benevolent spirit he presented himself as. Durotan, lost in his own voice speaking words to explain his decision, did not notice the shaman's shift in attention. But Ner'zhul felt Gul'dan's gaze upon him. and another fear welled up inside him that Gul'dan was bearing witness to his master's first hints of doubt.
What is the right thing to do? How can I best serve?
Why is Rulkan no longer coming to me?
He blinked and came back to himself when he realized tfrat Durotan had ceased speaking. The large chieftain was regarding Ner'zhul intently, waiting for the shaman to speak.
How best to handle this? Durotan was well regarded among the clans. If Ner'zhul punished Durotan for his decision, there would be many who would respond with sympathy to the Frostwolf clan. It could cause a rift in the fabric Ner'zhul was trying to weave, the tightly knit fabric of a united orc nation ... a Horde, if you will. On the other hand, if he condoned Durotan's actions, it would be a severe and insulting blow to those who had fervently supported his previous position that the draenei must die.
He could not decide. He stared at Durotan, who began to frown slightly.
"My master is so overcome with rage that he cannot speak," came Gul'dan's smooth voice. Both Durotan and Ner'zhul turned to look at the younger shaman. "You have disobeyed a direct order from your spiritual leader. Return to your camp, Durotan, son of Garad. My master will send you a letter shortly conveying his decision."
Durotan glanced back at Ner'zhul, his dislike of Gul'dan plain on his broad
face. Ner'zhul gathered himself and stood tall, and this time, when he reached for words, he found them. "Begone, Durotan. You have displeased me. and worse, you have displeased the being who has shown us such favor. You will hear from me soon enough."
Durotan bowed, but did not leave immediately. "There is one thing I do bring you," he said. He extended a small bundle to Ner'zhul. The shaman accepted it with hands that shook, and hoped desperately that both Durotan and Gul'dan would interpret the trembling as fury and not fear.
"We took these off the prisoners," Durotan continued. "Our shaman believe that they may hold power that we can use against the draenei."
He hesitated a moment longer, as if waiting for further word from Ner'zhul. When the silence stretched long and uncomfortably between them, he bowed again and left. For a long moment, neither master nor apprentice spoke.
"My master, please forgive me for interrupting. I saw you were so overcome that you could not speak, and I feared that the Frostwolf boy would misinterpret your anger as hesitancy."
Ner'zhul shot him a searching look. The words sounded sincere. Gul'dan's face looked sincere. And yet-There was once a time when Ner'zhul would have confessed his doubt to his apprentice. He had trusted and trained him for years. But now, at this moment, although battered by uncertainties as if by opposing winds, Ner'zhul knew one thing very clearly. He did not want Gul'dan to see any weakness in him.
"I was indeed overcome with rage," Ner'zhul lied. "Honor serves nothing if it hurts your people."
He realized he was clutching the bundle Durotan had given him. Gul'dan was staring at it almost hungrily.
"What did Durotan give you, to offset your anger with him?" Gul'dan inquired.
Ner'zhul looked at him with a superior air. "I will examine it first, and share it with Kil'jaeden, apprentice," he said coolly. He was looking for a reaction, and dreaded seeing it.
For the briefest of moments, anger flitted across Gul'dan's face. Then the younger orc bowed deeply and said contritely, "Of course, my master. It was arrogant of me to expect- I am merely curious, that is all, to see if the Frostwolf chieftain has contributed anything of worth."
Ner'zhul softened somewhat. Gul'dan had served him well and loyally for many years now, and indeed, would succeed Ner'zhul when the time came. He was jumping at shadows.
"Of course," Ner'zhul said, more gently. "I will let you know if I learn anything. After all, you are my apprentice, are you not?"
Gul'dan brightened. "I serve you in all things, my master." Looking happier, he bowed again and left Ner'zhul alone.
Ner'zhul sat heavily on the skins that served him for a bed. He cradled the bundle in his lap and said a prayer to the ancestors that if Durotan had failed to deliver the leader of the draenei, perhaps at least the Frostwolf chieftain had managed to obtain something of value.
He took a deep breath, unwrapped the bundle, and gasped. Nestled against soft fur were two glowing gems. Gingerly, Ner'zhul touched the red one and gasped again.
Energy, excitement, and a sense of power flowed through him. His hands wanted to grip a weapon, although he had had no need of one for years, and he yearned to swing it. Somehow he knew that if this crystal were on his person, his aim would be true. What a gift this was to the ores! He would have to see how he could turn this hot, red passion for fighting that lurked in the center of this stone to his purposes.
It took a great effort of will for him to release the red crystal. He breathed deeply, calming himself as his mind cleared.
The yellow one next.
Ner'zhul grasped it. This time, he had some idea of what to expect. Again, he felt it emanating warmth and a sensation of power.
But this time, there was no excitement, no urgency. As he held the yellow crystal, his mind cleared and he realized that he had hitherto been seeing things as if in a fog-dense valley. He could not find the words to describe it, but there was a purity, a clarity, a precision to everything. It was, in fact, so keen, so clear that Ner'zhul began to perceive this opening of his mind as pain.
He dropped the crystal back into his lap. The brilliant clarity, knife-sharp, faded somewhat.
Ner'zhul smiled. If he did not have Velen himself to present to Kil'jaeden. at least he had these precious items to offer to appease the magnificent being.
Kil'jaeden was furious.
Ner'zhul quaked before that anger, prostrating himself on the earth, murmuring, "Forgive me ..." as Kil'jaeden raged. He squeezed his eyes shut, anticipating pain such as he had never experienced to suddenly start shooting along his body, when abruptly the raging ceased.
Cautiously, Ner'zhul risked a glance at his benefactor, Kil'jaeden was once more looking serene, poised, and calm and bathed in radiance.
"I am . . . disappointed," the Beautiful One murmured. He shifted his weight from one enormous cloven foot to the other. "But I know two things. The Frostwolf clan leader is the one responsible. And you will never, ever, trust him with an important task again."
Relief swept through Ner'zhul and he almost fainted from the sensation, so powerful was it. "Of course not, my lord. Never again.
And . . . we did find these crystals for you."
"They are of little use to mc," said Kil'jaeden. Ner'zhul winced. "But I think your people might find them helpful in your battle to crush the draenei. That is your battle, is it not?" Fear again clenched hard at Ner'zhul's heart. "Of course, lord! It is the ancestors*
will."
Kil'jaeden looked at him for a moment, his brilliant eyes emanating flames. "It is my will." he said simply, and Ner'zhul nodded frantically.
"Of course, of course, it is your will, and I obey you in all things."
Kil'jaeden seemed satisfied by the response and nodded. Then he was gone, and Ner'zhul sank back, wiping a face greasy with the sweat of terror.
Out of the corner of his eye he saw a flash of something white. Gul'dan had seen everything.
We have been planning an attack for some time now, and last night, when the Pale Lady did not shine, we descended in force upon the sleeping little town. Not a one was left alive, not even the few children we found. Their supplies- food, armor, weapons, some strange items we know nothing of and shun- this bounty is now shared between the two unified clans. Their blood, blue and thick, dries now upon our faces, and we dance in celebration.
There was more to the missive, but Ner'zhul did not read it. He did not have to. Although the details might be different, the essence of the letters was always the same. A successful attack, glory in the killing, the ecstasy of blood spilled. Ner'zhul glanced at the pile of letters he had received just that morning: seven of them.
With each month that passed, even throughout the long, hard winter months, the ores grew more skilled at killing draenei. They had learned much about their foe with each victor)'. The stones that Durotan had given Ner'zhul proved to be valuable indeed, Ner'zhul worked with them, alone at first, and then in the company of other shaman. The red stone they dubbed the Heart of Fury, and they found that when the leader of a raid carried it. not only did he
fight with more energy and skill, but everyone under his command benefited as well. The stone was passed from clan to clan at each new moon, and was highly coveted. Yet Ner'zhul knew no one would dare to steal it for himself.
The second stone he called the Brilliant Star, and he found that when a shaman carried the crystal, he or she experienced a profound focus and clarity. While the Heart of Fury roused the emotions, the Brilliant Star calmed them. The thought process was swifter and more precise, and concentration was not easily broken. The result was powerful magic, precisely controlled ... another key to an orcish victor)'. The delicious irony that they were using the draenei's own magic against them further improved morale among the ores.
But all these things did not hearten Ner'zhul. The sudden flash of doubt that had shuddered through him when he had spoken with Durotan had shaken him to the bone. He fought back the suspicions, terrified that somehow Kil'jaeden was able to read his thoughts. But they came, like maggots writhing from a corpse, to haunt his sleeping and waking thoughts. Kil'jaeden looked very, very similar to the draenei. Was it possible that they were somehow the same? And was he, Ner'zhul, being used in some sort of civil war?
One night, he found he could no longer bear it. Silently, he dressed and roused his wolf Skychascr, who stretched and blinked at him sleepily
"Come, my friend." Ner'zhul said affectionately as he settled on the great creature's back. He had never before ridden to the sacred mountain. Always, he had walked, as was tradition. But he needed to return before he was missed, and he was certain that the urgency of his mission would mitigate his offense with the ancestors.
It was almost spring, almost time for the Kosh'harg festival, but spring seemed far away as the cold wind bit at Ner'zhul's cars and nose. He huddled down, grateful for the warmth of the massive wolf, and shielded himself as best he could from the wind and now snow.
The wolf pressed on through the drifts, making steady if not swift progress.
At last. Ner'zhul looked up and saw the perfect triangle of the Mountain of Spirits, and a great weight suddenly lifted from his heart. For the first time in months, he truly felt as if he was doing the right thing.
Skychascr would have difficulty climbing, so with a command to "stay" he settled down, burrowing into a drift and curling up tightly. Ner'zhul did not imagine he would be more than a few hours, and hurried to climb
the mountain with more alacrity than he had felt in a long time, his sack heavy with watcrskins and his heart full of anticipation.
He should have done this long ago. He should have gone right to the source of wisdom, as shaman before him had done. He had no idea why he had never thought of this before.
At last he came to the entrance and paused before the perfect oval. As anxious as he was to reach the ancestors, he knew the ritual must be honored. He lit the bundle of dried grasses he carried and let its sweet scent calm and purify his thoughts. Then he stepped forward, murmuring a spell to light the torches that lined the walk. Ner'zhul had walked this path more times than he could recall, and his feet moved steadily as if of their own accord. Down twined the smooth path, and Ner'zhul's heart raced with hope as he stepped forward into the darkness.
It seemed to take longer than usual for him to become aware of the increase in light. Ner'zhul stepped into the cavern, and thought that somehow, the light emanating from the sacred pool seemed dimmer than it had been in the past. The thought unsettled him.
He took a deep breath and chided himself. He was bringing his own external fears to this sacred space, nothing more. He stepped to the pool, removed the watcrskins from his pack, and poured out the contents. The soft splashing of water was the only sound, and it seemed to echo. His offering complete, Ner'zhul sat by the water's edge and waited, gazing into the radiant depths.
Nothing happened.
He did not panic. Sometimes the ancestors took their time about responding.
But when more time had passed, uncase began to stir in Ner'zhul's heart. Moved, he spoke aloud.
"Ancestors . . . beloved dead ... I, Ner'zhul, shaman of the Shadowmoon clan, leader to your children, have come seeking . . . no.
begging wisdom. I-I have lost my way to your light. The times are dark and fearful even as we grow stronger, more united as a people. I question the path I am on. and I beseech your guidance. Please, if ever you loved and cared for those who have followed in your footsteps, come to me now and advise me, that I may lead them well!"
His voice quavered. He knew he sounded lost and pathetic, and for a moment stubborn pride made him flush with shame. But then that feeling was chased away by the knowledge that he did care for his people, he did want to do what was right for them, and at this moment he had no idea what that might be.
The pool began to glow. Ner'zhul leaned forward eagerly, his eyes roaming the surface, and in the water, he saw a face looking back at him.
"Rulkan," he breathed. For a moment quick tears mercifully blurred her image. He blinked and his heart lurched with pain as he saw the look in her ghostly eyes.
It was hatred.
Ner'zhul recoiled as if struck. Other faces began to appear in the water, dozens of them. All of them had the same expression.
Nausea welled in him and he cried out, "Please! Help me! Grant me your wisdom that I may win favor again in your eyes!"
Rulkan's severe features softened somewhat, and it was with a trace of compassion in her voice that she spoke. "There is nothing you can do, not
now. not in a hundred years, to win favor in our eyes. You are not a savior of your people, but their betrayer."
"No!" he shrieked. "No, tell me what to do and I will do it. It is not too late, surely it is not too late-"
"You are not strong enough," said another rumbling voice, this one male. "If you were, you would never have walked so far down this path. You would not have been so easily gulled into doing the will of one who bears no love for our people."
"But- I do not understand," Ner'zhul murmured. "Rulkan, you came to me! I heard you! You, Grekshar-you advised me!
Kil'jaeden was the one you wanted me to embrace! The Great Friend to all the ores!
She said nothing in response to this; she did not have to. Even as the words tumbled from his lips he understood how profoundly he had been misled.
The ancestors had never appeared to him at all. It had all been a trick concocted by Kil'jaeden, whoever- whatever-he was.
They were right not to trust Ner'zhul now. Any shaman who would be so easily deceived could never be trusted to put things right again. All was an elaborate web of lies and deceit and manipulation. And he, Ner'zhul, had been the first foolish insect to become inextricably trapped in it.
Nearly a hundred draenei were dead. There was no turning back, no requesting aid from the ancestors. He could not trust any of his visions ever again, except to understand that they were likely to be lies. Worst of all, he had delivered his people into the hands of one who, despite his fair appearance and his honeyed words, did not have their best interests in whatever passed for his heart.
Even as he stared into the ghostly eyes of his beloved, she turned away from him. One by one, the myriad faces reflected in the water followed suit.
Ner'zhul trembled with the horror of what he had done. There was nothing he could do to make it right. Nothing he could do except continue on this path that Kil'jaeden had so carefully contrived for him to walk, and pray to ancestors who no longer listened to him that somehow, some way, things would turn out all right. He buried his face in his hands and wept.
Crouching in the darkness in a bend in the tunnel, Gul'dan listened to the sound of his master sobbing, and smiled to himself.
Kil'jaeden would be grateful for the information.
Twelve
We are all weak, in one way or another. It does not matter the species. Sometimes that weakness is a strength in disguise.
Sometimes it is our utter undoing. Sometimes it is both. The wise man understands his weakness and seeks to find a lesson from it.
The fool lets it control and destroy him.
And sometimes, the wise man is a fool.
As he rode back atop Skychaser, hands so cold that he wondered if he would ever be able to unclench them entwined in the thick black fur, Ner'zhul wished for the dark night to swallow him. How could he return to his people, knowing what he had done to them? On the other hand, how could he flee -and where could he possibly go that Kil'jaeden would not find him? He longed bitterly for the courage to take the ritual knife he carried at all times and drive it into his heart, but knew that he could not. Suicide was not regarded with honor among his people; it was a coward's answer to the problems that came at him. He would not be permitted to live on as a spirit if he took that seductive way to escape the horrors that confronted him.
He could continue to pretend that he suspected nothing, and even perhaps subtly undercut Kil'jaeden. Despite his massive powers, there had been no evidence that the so-called "Beautiful One" had the ability to read thoughts. The thought brightened Ner'zhul somewhat. Yes ... he could mitigate the damage this interloper was trying to do to his people. That was how he could continue to serve.
Exhausted both physically and emotionally, Ner'zhul stumbled into his tent in that faint hour before dawn, looking forward to simply collapsing on the skins and sleeping in an effort to forget, for at least a brief while, the agony of what he had brought about.
Instead a bright light nearly blinded him and he fell to his knees.
"You would betray me, then?" said the Beautiful One.
Ner'zhul threw up his hands, trying vainly to protect his eves from the awesome radiance. His stomach
J roiled and he feared he was about to be sick in his terror. The light dimmed somewhat and he lowered his hands. Standing beside Kil'jaeden was Ner'zhul's apprentice, grinning darkly.
"Gul'dan," whispered Ner'zhul sickly. "What have you done?"
"I have informed Kil'jaeden of a rodent," Gul'dan said calmly. That dreadful smile never left his face. 'And he will decide what to do with the vermin who would so turn against him."
There was still snow on Gul'dan's shoulders. Dully, Ner'zhul realized what had happened. His apprentice, hungry for power-how was it Ner'zhul had closed his eyes to the obvious for so long?-had followed him. Had heard the ancestors' words. And still he clung to Kil'jaeden, after hearing the same things Ner'zhul had heard? For a moment, his own fear and selfishness went away, and Ner'zhul felt only a wave of pity for an orc who had fallen so far.
"It wounds me," Kil'jaeden said. Ner'zhul looked at him, startled. "I chose you, Ner'zhul. I gave you my powers. I showed you what you need to do to advance your people and ensure that they are never second in this world."
Ner'zhul spoke without thinking. "You have deceived me. You have sent me false visions. You have maligned the ancestors and all they stood for. I don't know why you are doing this, but I know that it is not out of love for my people."
"And yet they flourish. They are united, for the first time in many centuries."
"United under a lie," Ner'zhul said. He was giddy in his rebellion. It felt good. Perhaps if he continued, Kil'jaeden would lose patience with him and
slay him, and Ner'zhul's problem would be solved. But Kil'jaeden did not respond with deadly fury as Ner'zhul hoped he would. Instead the being sighed deeply and shook his head, like a parent disappointed in a wayward child.
"You may yet regain my favor, Ner'zhul," Kil'jaeden said, "I have a task for you. If you complete it, your lapse of faith will be overlooked."
Ner'zhul's lips moved. He wanted to shout out his rebellion again, but this time the words would not come. He realized that the moment had passed. He did not want to die, any more than any sane, living being wanted to die, and so he remained silent.
"What happened with the Frostwolf chieftain troubles mc," Kil'jaeden continued. "Not least because he is not the only one who has murmured against what is happening. There are others-the one who wields the Doomhammer, some among the Bladcwind
and Rcdwalker clans as well. It would be one thing if these opposing voices belonged to those of no consequence, but many of them do not. There must be no risk to the success of my plan. Therefore, I will guarantee their obedience.
"It is not enough for them to swear loyalty," Kil'jaeden continued. He tapped his check with one long red finger thoughtfully.
"Too many seem enamored of changing what 'honor' and 'oath' mean. We must . . . ensure their cooperation, for now, and for all time."
Gul'dan's small eyes glinted. "What is it you suggest. Great One?"
Kil'jaeden smiled at Gul'dan. Already, Ner'zhul could see the bond between them-sec how like Kil'jaeden Gul'dan was in a way that Ner'zhul had never been. Kil'jaeden had been forced to use seductive lies and trickery in order to pull Ner'zhul to his cause; with Gul'dan, he could speak openly.
"There is such a way," Kil'jaeden said, speaking to both orc shaman now. "A
way to make them forever bound to us. Forever loyal."
Ner'zhul had thought that he had become inured to horror after what the ancestors had revealed to him, but now he realized that he was capable of experiencing an entirely new level of shock as he listened to Kil'jaeden outline the plan. Forever bound. Forever loyal.
Forever enslaved.
He looked up into Kil'jaeden's blazing eyes, and words would not come. A nod would suffice, he knew, but he could not even bring himself to do that. Instead he simply stared, transfixed, like a bird before a snake.
Kil'jaeden heaved a deep sigh. "You refuse your chance at redemption in my eyes, then?"
As he heard Kil'jaeden speak, it was as if a spell had been removed from Ner'zhul. The words that had been stuck in his throat came rushing out, and although he knew they would mean his doom, the shaman made no move to stop them.
"I refuse utterly to forever doom my people to a life of slavery," he cried. Kil'jaeden listened, then nodded his massive head. "This is your choice. You have also chosen the consequences. Know this, shaman. Your choice averts nothing. My desires will still be carried out. Your people will still be slaves. But instead of leading them and lingering in my favor, you will be forced to be a helpless observer. I think that will be sweeter than if I simply slew you."
Ner'zhul opened his mouth to speak, but he could not. Kil'jaeden narrowed his great eyes, and Ner'zhul could not even move.
Even his heart, slamming wildly in his chest, beat only by the will of Lord Kil'jaeden, and he knew it.
How had he been such a gullible fool? How had he not seen through the lies?
How could he have mistaken an illusion sent by this.. , this monster to be the
spirit of his beloved mate? Tears welled in his eyes and slipped down his checks, only, he knew, because Kil'jaeden permitted it.
Kil'jaeden smiled at him, then slowly, deliberately turned his attention to Gul'dan. Even in his wretched state, Ner'zhul took the faintest comfort in the knowledge that he had not turned to Kil'jaeden with the expression Gul'dan now wore, that of a hungry pup eager for praise.
"There is no need to trap you with pretty lies, is there, my new tool?" said Kil'jaeden, speaking almost fondly to Gul'dan, "You do not shrink from the truth."
"Indeed, no. lord. I live to do your bidding."
Kil'jaeden chuckled. "If I will do away with lies, so
must you. You live for power. You hunger for it. You thirst for it. And over the last few months, your skill has grown to where I can make proper use of you. Ours is not a partnership of adoration or respect, but one of convenience and selfish benefit. Which means that it will likely last."
Various emotions flitted across Gul'dan's face. He did not seem to know how to react to the words, and Ner'zhul took pleasure in his former apprentice's discomfiture.
"As . . . you will." Gul'dan stammered finally, then with more confidence, "tell me what you would have me do, and I swear, it will be done."
"You have no doubt perceived that I wish to exterminate the draenei. Why I do so is no concern of yours. You need only know that I wish it. The orcs are doing moderately well in this, but they can do better. They shall do better. A warrior is only as good as his weapons, and, Gul'dan, I intend to give you and your people weapons such as you have never conceived. It will take a little time; you must be educated first, before you are fit to teach the others. Are you ready and willing?"
Gul'dan's eyes shone, "Begin the lessons. Glorious One. and you will see how
apt a pupil of yours I am."
Kil'jaeden laughed.
Durotan was covered with blood, much of it his own. What had gone wrong? Everything had progressed as normal. They had found the hunting party, descended upon them, initiated the attack, and waited for the shaman to use their magic to fight the draenei.
They did not do so. Instead Frostwolf after Frostwolf fell beneath the shining blades and blue-white magics of the draenei. At one point, fighting for his very life, Durotan saw that Drek'Thar was fighting desperately, using nothing but his staff.
What had happened? Why had the shaman not come to his aid? What was Drek'Thar thinking? He could wield a staff hardly
better than a child-why did he not use his magic?
The draenei fought furiously, seizing the opportunities the shaman's inexplicable inaction had given them. They pressed their attack harder than Durotan had ever seen, their eyes glinting as for perhaps the first time they sensed victory. The grass was slippery with blood, and Durotan's feet went out from under him. He fell, and his attacker raised his sword.
This was the moment, then. He would die in glorious battle. Except he did not feel that this was a glorious battle. By instinct alone, he raised his axe to parry the blow that would come, although his arm had been deeply cut at the joint of the armor and his limb quivered. He looked up into the eyes of the one who would slay him.
And recognized Restalaan.
At that moment, the draenei captain of the guard's own glowing blue eyes widened in recognition and he
stayed his blow. Durotan gasped for breath, trying to summon the energy to
rise and continue the fight. Restalaan uttered something in his ululating tongue, and every draenei halted almost in mid-swing.
As Durotan got to his feet, he realized that there were only a handful of his warriors left alive. Two more moments of battle and the draenei would have slaughtered the entire party, with only two or three casualties on their own side.
Restalaan whirled on Durotan. Various expressions warred on his ugly face: compassion, disgust, regret, determination. "For the act of compassion and honor you showed our prophet, Durotan, son of Garad, you and those of your clan who yet live have been spared. Treat your wounded and return to your homes. But do not think to receive such mercy from us again. Honor has been satisfied."
Durotan weaved as if he had had too much to drink as blood dripped from deep wounds. He forced himself to stay on his feet by sheer will as the draenei turned and disappeared over the horizon. Once they were out of sight, he could force his legs to hold him no longer and he fell to his knees. Several ribs had been cracked or broken, and each inhalation sent a stabbing pain through him.
"Durotan!"
It was Draka. She, too, had been badly injured, but her voice was strong. Relief washed over Durotan. Thank the ancestors, she yet lived. Drek'Thar hurried up to him and placed his hands on Durotan's heart, murmuring under his breath. Warmth flooded Durotan and the pain cased. He took a deep, nourishing breath.
"At least they will let me heal," said Drek'Thar, so softly that Durotan was scarce certain he heard the words.
"Tend to the others, and then we will speak," Durotan said. Drek'Thar nodded, not meeting his chieftain's eves. He and the other shaman hastened to magically heal what wounds they could, and treat with salves and bandages what they could not. Durotan still had injuries, but nothing life-threatening,
and he assisted the shaman.
When Durotan had done all he could, he rose and looked around. No fewer than fifteen bodies were stiffening on the green grass, including Rokkar, his second. Durotan shook his head in stunned disbelief.
He would have to return with litters, to bear the fallen back to their lands. They would burn on a pyre, their bodies given to fire, their ashes to air, to be consumed by water and earth. Their spirits would go to Oshu'gun, and the shaman would converse with them on matters of profound importance.
Or would they? Something terrible had happened, and it was time he found out what.
Sudden anger flooded him at the waste. Despite what the ancestors had told him, something inside Durotan continued to whisper that this attack on the
draenei was a grave mistake. He whirled on Drek'Thar, and with a deep growl seized the smaller orc where he sat gulping water and hauled him to his feet.
"This was a slaughter!" Durotan cried, shaking him furiously. "Fifteen of our kin lie dead before us! The earth drinks deeply of their blood, and I never saw you or any of the others lend your skill to the fight!"
For a moment, Drek'Thar could not speak. The meadow was deathly silent as every Frostwolf watched the confrontation. Then, in a faint voice, Drek'Thar replied, "The elements-they would not come this time."
Durotan's eyes narrowed. Still clutching Drek'Thar by the front of his leather jerkin, he demanded of the wide-eyed, silent shaman, "Is this true? They would not lend their aid to the battle?"
Looking stunned and sick, the shaman nodded. One said in a quavering voice, "It is true, great chieftain. I asked all of them in turn. They said . .. they said it was out of balance, and they would no longer permit us to use their powers."
Durotan's shock was broken by an angry hiss. He turned to see Draka's scowling face. "This is more than a sign! This is a shout, a battle cry, that what We are doing is wrong!"
Slowly, trying to comprehend the magnitude of what had happened, Durotan nodded. If it were not for the mercy Restalaan had shown him, he and every last member of the war party would be lying on the earth. their bodies growing colder by the moment.
The elements had refused their assistance. They had condemned what the shaman were asking of them.
Durotan took a deep breath and shook his head, as if to physically shake away the dark thoughts. "Let us get the injured back to their homes as swiftly as we may. And then . . . then I will send out letters. If what I fear is true- that it is not only the shaman of the Frostwolf clan who are shunned by the elements for what we are doing to the draenei-then we must confront Ner'zhul."
Thirteen
How is it we did not see? It is easy to lay the blame on the charismatic Kil'jaeden, or the weak Ner'zhul, or the power-hungry Gul'dan for our fall. But they asked of each individual orc to pretend that hot was cold, that sweet was sour, and even when everything in us screamed against what we were being told, we followed. I was not there, I cannot say why. Perhaps I, too, would have obeyed like a whipped cur. Periiaps thefearwas so great, or the respect for our leaders so ingrained. Perhaps.
Or perhaps I, like my father and others, would start to see the flaws. I would like to think so.
Blackhand looked out from under his bushy eyebrows, frowning. He always looked like he was frowning, perhaps because he almost always was.
"I do not know about this. Gul'dan." he rumbled. His oversized hand went to the hilt of his sword, fondling it in an uneasy gesture.
When Gul'dan had asked to meet with Blackhand a fortnight ago, and to bring his most promising shaman but to tell no one of what they were to be doing, he had agreed. Blackhand had always liked Gul'dan better than Ner'zhul, although he was not sure why. When Gul'dan sat down with him over a lavish meal and explained the current situation, Blackhand was very glad he had come. Now he knew why he liked Gul'dan so much; the former apprentice, now master, was like Blackhand himself. He had no use for ideals, only practicalities. And power, good food, lavish armor, and bloodshed were things both ores craved.
Blackhand was chieftain of the Blackrock ores. He could rise no higher. At least. . . not until now. When the clans were separate, the greatest glory was to lead one's clan. But now . . . now they were working together. Now Blackhand could see the glint of greed in Gul'dan's small eyes. He could almost smell the hunger wafting off the other ore, a hunger he shared.
"Ner'zhul is an honored and valued advisor," Gul'dan said as he chewed dried fruit, extending a claw to pick a chunk where it had gotten lodged between his teeth. "He has great wisdom. But ... it has been decided that I would be a better choice to lead the ores from this point on."
Blackhand grinned savagely. Ner'zhul was nowhere to be seen.
"And a wise leader surrounds himself with trusted allies," Gul'dan continued. "Those who are strong and obedient. Who will fulfill their obligations. And who, for their loyalty, will be held in high regard and richly rewarded."
Blackhand had begun to bridle at the description "obedient," but was mollified when Gul'dan mentioned "high regard" and "richly rewarded." He glanced over at the eight shaman he had brought to Gul'dan. They were sitting huddled over a second fire some distance away, being attended to by Gul'dan's servants. They looked wretchedly unhappy, and were conveniently out of earshot.
Blackhand said, "You asked for the shaman. I assume you know what is happening with them?"
Gul'dan sighed and reached for a talbuk leg. He bit deeply into it, the juices running down his face. He wiped hisjuttingjaw absently, chewed, swallowed, and answered.
"Yes, I have heard. The elements are no longer obeying them."
Blackhand watched him intendy. "Some air beginning to mutter that it is because what we are doing is wrong."
"Do you think that?"
Blackhand shrugged his massive shoulders. "I don't know what to think. This is all new territory. The ancestors say one thing, but the elements won't come."
He was harboring a growing suspicion about the ancestors as well, but held
his tongue. Blackhand knew that many thought him a fool; he preferred to let them think he was nothing mote than a strong arm and a powerful sword. It gave him distinct advantages.
Gul'dan perused him now. and Blackhand wondered if the new spiritual leader of the ores had sensed there was more to the orc leader than met the eye.
"We are a proud race." Gul'dan said. "It is sometimes painful to admit that We do not know everything. Kil'jaeden and the entities he leads . . . ah. Blackhand, the mysteries they harbor! The power they wield-power they are willing to share with usl"
Gul'dan's eyes sparkled now with excitement. Blackhand's own heart began to race. Gul'dan leaned forward and continued to speak in an awed whisper.
"We air as ignorant children before them. Even you-even I. But they are willing to teach us. Share with us some of their power.
Power that is not dependent upon the whim of the spirits of air. earth, fire, and water." Gul'dan made a dismissive gesture. "Power such as that is feeble. It is not reliable. It can desert you in the middle of a battle and leave you helpless."
Blackhand's face hardened. He had witnessed this very thing, and it had taken all the strength of his warriors to snatch victory when the shaman had begun yelping in terror that the elements were no longer working with them.
"I am listening," he growled softly.
"Imagine what you could do if you led a group of shaman who controlled the source of their powers, in
stead of begging and scraping for it," Gul'dan continued. "Imagine if these shaman had servants who could also fight on your side.
Servants who could, say, send your enemies fleeing helplessly in terror. Suck
their magic dry as the insects in the summer suck blood. Distract them so that their attention was not on battle."
Blackhand lifted a bushy eyebrow. "I can imagine success under those conditions. Success almost every time."
Gul'dan nodded, grinning. "Exactly."
"But how do you know this is true, and not some false promise whispered in your car?"
Gul'dan's grin widened. "Because, my friend ... I have experienced this. And I will teach your shaman over there everything I know."
"Impressive," rumbled Blackhand.
"But that is not all that I can offer. The warriors-I know a way to make you and everyone who fights at your side more powerful, fiercer, deadlier. All this can be ours if We but claim it."
"Ours?"
"I cannot continue to waste my time speaking with every single leader of every single clan every time they have a complaint."
Gul'dan said, waving his hand imperiously. "There are those who are in agreement with what you and I think is the best way to proceed . . . and those who are not."
"Go on," said Blackhand.
But Gul'dan did not, at least not right away. He was silent, gathering his thoughts. Blackhand grasped a stick and poked at the fire.
He knew well that most of the orcs,even those of his own clan, thought him hotheaded and impetuous, but he knew the value of patience.
"I envision two groups of leaders of the ores. One, a simple governing
council to make decisions for the whole, its leader elected, its business conducted openly for all to see. The second ... a shadow of this group. Hidden. Secret. Powerful," Gul'dan said quietly. "This . . . this Shadow Council will be comprised of ores who share our vision, and who are willing to make the necessary sacrifices to obtain it."
Blackhand nodded. "Yes . . . yes, I sec. A public leadership . .. and a private one."
Gul'dan's mouth stretched in a slow grin. Blackhand regarded him for a moment, then asked the question.
"And to which one shall I belong?"
"Both, my friend," Gul'dan answered smoothly. "You are a born leader. You have charisma, strength, and even your enemies know you are a master strategist. It will be case itself to have you elected as leader of the ores."
Blackhand's eyes flashed. "I am no puppet," he growled softly.
"Of course not," said Gul'dan. "Which is why I said you would belong to both. You would be the leader of this new breed of ore, this ... this Horde, if you will. And you will be on the Shadow Council as well. We cannot work together unless we can trust one another, can we?"
Blackhand gazed into Gul'dan's glinting, clever eyes
and smiled. He did not trust the shaman in the least bit, and he suspected that Gul'dan felt the same about him. It didn't matter.
They both wanted power. Blackhand knew he did not possess the talents and skills that would enable him to wield the sort of power for which Gul'dan lusted. And Gul'dan did not want the sort of power Blackhand craved. They were not in competition, but in league; what benefited one would benefit the other, not rob him of a thing.
Blackhand thought of his family-his mate, Urukal, his two sons. Rend and
Maim, his daughter Grisclda. He did not dote on them the wav that the weak Durotan doted on his mate Draka, of course, but he cared for them. He wanted to see his mate bedecked in jewels, his sons and daughter revered, as befitted the children of Blackhand.
Out of the corner of his eye, he caught a movement. Turning, he beheld Ner'zhul, once the powerful and now the discarded, slipping out of the door of the tent.
"What about him?" Blackhand asked.
Gul'dan shrugged. "What about him? He means nothing now. The Beautiful One wishes him kept alive for the moment. He seems to have something . . . special in mind for Ner'zhul. He will still be a figurehead; love of Ner'zhul is too ingrained in the ores to cast him aside just yet. But do not worry, he is no threat to us."
"The Blackrock shaman . . . you say you will train them in these new magics? The magics that you yourself have studied? That they will be invincible?" "I will train them myself, and if they adapt well to the new arts. I will place them first among my new warlocks,"
Warlock. So that was the name of this new type of magic. It had an interesting sound to it. Warlock. And the Blackrock warlocks would be the first ones chosen.
"Blackhand, chieftain of the Blackrock clan, what say you to my proposal?"
Blackhand slowly turned toward Gul'dan. "I say, hail to the Horde-and hail to the Shadow Council."
It was an angry crowd that showed up at the foot of the sacred mountain. Durotan had sent out messages to others he trusted, and had received confirmation that the elements indeed had shunned the shaman. One particularly painful report came from the Bonechewer clan. Their entire party had fallen to the draenei, their annihilation remaining a mystery until a few days later when a shaman who had stayed behind tried to heal a sick child.
Now they were coming, the clan leaders and their shaman, to meet with Ner'zhul and demand an explanation.
Ner'zhul came out to greet them, waving his hands and asking for silence.
"I know why you have come today," he said. Durotan frowned. Ner'zhul was so far away that he seemed a mere speck, and yet Durotan could hear him perfectly. He knew that usually, Ner'zhul
achieved this feat by asking the wind to bear his words so that all could hear him. Yet, if the elements had indeed refused the shaman, how was that possible? He exchanged glances with Draka, but both remained silent.
"It is indeed true that the elements no longer answer the shaman's call for aid." Ner'zhul kept speaking, but his words were drowned out by angry shouts. He looked down for a moment, and Durotan regarded him closely. The spiritual leader of the ores looked more frail, more downtrodden, than Durotan had ever seen. Of course, Durotan thought.
After a few moments, the shouting died down. The ores assembled were angry, but they wanted answers more than they wanted to vent their rage.
"Some of you have, upon discovering this, leaped to a conclusion that what we are doing is wrong. But that is incorrect. What We are doing is achieving power the likes of which We have never seen. My apprentice, the noble Gul'dan, has studied these powers. I will let him answer any questions you have."
Ner'zhul turned and, leaning heavily on his staff, stepped aside. Gul'dan bowed deeply to his master. Ner'zhul did not seem to notice. He stood, his eyes closed, looking old and frail.
In contrast, Durotan had never seen Gul'dan looking better. There was a new energy about the ore, a strong sense of confidence in his bearing and in his voice when he spoke. "What I am about to tell you may be hard for you to accept, but I have faith that my people are not closc-minded when it comes to ways to better themselves," he said. His voice was clear and strong. "Just as
we were surprised and awed to lcam that there were powerful beings other than the ancestors and the elements, we have discovered that there are ways to harness magic other than cooperating with the elements. Power that is not predicated on asking or begging or pleading , , , power that comes because we are strong enough to demand it to come. To control it when it docs. To force it to obey us, bend to our will, rather than the other way around."
Gul'dan paused to let this sink in, looking around at the gathered ores. Durotan glanced at Drek'Thar.
"Is this possible?" he asked his friend.
Drek'Thar shrugged helplessly. He looked completely startled at Gul'dan's words. "I have no idea," he said, "But I tell you, after that last battle . . . Durotan, the shaman were doing the work of the ancestors! How could the elements refuse us under those circumstances? And how could the ancestors allow such a thing?"
His voice turned bitter as he spoke. The shock and shame was still upon him. Durotan understood that the shaman felt like a warrior who had reached confidently for his axe and found it turning to smoke in his hands-an axe a trusted friend had given him, an axe he had been asked to use in a good cause.
"Yes! Yes, I see you understand the value of what I- what the Beautiful One who has taken us under his wing is offering,"
Gul'dan said, nodding. "I have studied with this great entity, as have these few noble shaman,"
He stepped back and several shaman, dressed in some of the most beautifully tooled leather armor Durotan had ever seen, stepped forward.
"They are all Blackrock ores," Draka murmured, her brows drawing together in a frown. Durotan had noticed that too.
"What they have learned," Gul'dan continued, "will be taught to every single
shaman who wishes to be instructed. This, I swear to you. Follow me now to the open lands where our Kosh'harg rituals have been held as far back as anyone can remember. I will have them demonstrate their formidable skills."
For some reason he could not fathom, Durotan felt suddenly ill, Draka squeezed his arm reassuringly, noticing his abrupt paleness.
"My mate, what is it?" she asked quietly as, along with everyone else assembled, the two moved toward the Kosh'harg festival grounds.
He shook his head. "I don't know," he said in an equally soft voice. "I just... I feel as though something terrible is about to happen."
Draka grunted. "I have been feeling that way for a long time now."
Durotan kept his face neutral with an effort. He was responsible for the welfare of his people, and his position with Ner'zhul and likely now Gul'dan was already precarious. Durotan was well aware that if cither shaman sought to discredit him or his clan, it would be easier than it had been in the past. With the clear focus on union, for the Frostwolf clan to be exiled or in any way cut off could spell extinction for them. Durotan did not like the direction in which things were going, but he could protest only so much.
For himself, he did not care. But he could not permit his clan to suffer.
And yet-his blood raced, his heart shook, his body trembled with foreboding. He said a quick prayer to the ancestors that they would continue to guide his people wisely.
They reached the flat river valley that for generations had played host to the Kosh'harg festival. As his feet touched the sacred ground. Durotan felt himself relaxing slightly. Memories came back to him. and he smiled as they brushed his mind. He recalled that fateful night when he and Orgrim had both decided to fly in the face of tradition and dared to spy on the adults as they spoke-and how disappointed both had been at the mundane conversations. Wiser now. he was sure that he and Orgrim, bold though they had thought themselves at the time, had likely not been the first to be so daring, nor were
they likely to be the last.
He recalled, too, his first real glimpse of the female who would become his life-mate, hunting in these lush fields, dancing around the fire to the sound of the drums throbbing in his veins, and chanting to the moon. As
long as his people still had this, he thought, all would still be well with them. Heartened somewhat, he looked over at where the dancing was usually held. A small tent was erected, and he wondered what it was for.
He and Draka halted a few yards away from the tent, assuming it was part of the demonstration. The others followed suit. The sun shone brightly as more and more ores gathered. Durotan saw that most of those who had come today were clan chieftains and their shaman, so the site did not have to accommodate quite as many as it did during the festival time.
Gul'dan waited until everyone else was assembled before striding purposefully toward the tent. The shaman trained in this mysterious new magic followed him. They all strode with confidence and pride. Coming to a halt in front of the tent, Gul'dan beckoned to a few of the Blackrock warriors, who stepped forward and stood at attention.
At that moment, the wind shifted. Durotan's eyes widened as a familiar scent was carried to his nostrils.
Draenei...
Low murmurs around him told him that he was not the only one who had caught the scent. At that moment, Gul'dan nodded to the warriors. They disappeared inside the tent for a brief moment.
Eight draenei. their hands tighdy bound, emerged from the tent.
Their faces were puffy and swollen from beatings. Rags had been shoved in their mouths. Blood was caked on their blue skin and what Htdc remained of their clothing. Durotan stared.
"When the Blackrock clan fought using the magic I am about to share with you. their victory was so absolute that they were able to take several prisoners," Gul'dan said proudly. "These prisoners will help me show you what these new magical abilities can do."
Outrage flooded Durotan. Slaying a foe in armed combat was one thing. Slaughtering helpless prisoners was another. He opened his mouth, but a hand on his arm stayed his words. He glanced up angrily into Or-grim Doomhammer's cool gray eyes.
"You knew about this." Durotan hissed, his words for his old friend's cars alone.
"Keep your voice down," Orgrim hissed back, glancing about to see if anyone was paying attention to them. No one was; everyone's attention was riveted on Gul'dan and the draenei prisoners. "Yes, t knew. I was there when we captured them. It is the way of such things. Durotan."
"It did not use to be the way of the ores." Durotan replied.
"It is now." Orgrim said. "It is a sad necessity. For what it is worth, I do not believe that this will become a common practice. The goal is to slay the draenei, not torment them."
Durotan stared at his old friend. Orgrim kept the gaze for a moment, then flushed and looked away. Durotan felt his outrage abate somewhat. At least Orgrim understood what a violation this was. even if he supported it. But what else could Orgrim have done? He was second in command to Blackhand. He was oath-bound to support his chieftain. Like Durotan, he had responsibilities to others he simply could not shirk. For the first time in his life, Durotan wished he were a mere clan member.
He looked down into his mate's eyes. She stared, aghast, first at him and then at Orgrim. And then, he saw the sorrow and resignation flit across her features and she lowered her head.
"These beings have worth to us in this moment," Gul'dan was saying.
Durotan. his body feeling heavy as lead, dragged his gaze to the shaman. "We will use them to demonstrate these new powers."
He nodded to the first Blackrock shaman in line, who bowed. Looking slightly nervous, the female closed her eyes and
concentrated. A sound like rushing wind filled Durotan's cars. A strange pattern written in purple light appeared at her feet, encircling her. Above her head, a purple cube turned idly. Then, suddenly, a small, squawking creature appeared at her feet. It capered, its eyes blazing red, its small but sharp teeth bared in what looked like a smile. Durotan heard mur-murings and some hisses of fear.
Other shaman followed suit, summoning the same eerie purple circles and cubes, manifesting creatures seemingly out of thin air.
Some were large, shapeless things in hues of blue and purple, hovering ominously. Other beings were fair to look upon, save for their hooved feet and batlikc wings. Some were large, some small, and all sat or stood quietly beside those who had called them into being.
"Pretty little pets, to be sure," came the distinctive voice of Grom Hcllscrcam, dripping with sarcasm. "But what do they do?"
Gul'dan smiled indulgently. "Patience, Hcllscrcam," he said, almost condescendingly. "It is a strength, not a weakness."
Hcllscrcam's brows drew together, but he stayed silent. He was as curious as anyone, Durotan assumed. Blackhand stood, smiling a little, looking like a proud father. Only he seemed unsurprised by what was unfolding here, and Durotan realized that he must have already witnessed the powers of the newly trained shaman. Witnessed, and approved.
One of the draenei was cut loose from the rest and shoved forward. His hands still bound, he stumbled a few steps on his cloven feet, then stood erect. His face was impassive. Only his slowly moving tail gave any indication of stress.
The first shaman stepped forward, moving her hands and murmuring slightly. The little creature at her side squawked and jumped about, then suddenly fire erupted from its clawed hands to slam into the hapless draenei. At the same moment, a ball of... darkness
... formed at the shaman's fingertips and rushed toward the prisoner. It grunted in pain as its blue flesh was
blackened and burned from the small creature's attack, but it dropped to its knees in obvious agony as the shadow ball struck it.
Again the shaman muttered something, and flames erupted from the very flesh of the tortured draenei. Where before he had been stoic and silent, now he screamed in torment, his cries muffled somewhat by the gag in his throat, but not completely. He jerked and spasmed on the earth, flailing like a fish freshly hooked, his eyes rolling wildly. Then he was still. The reck of burned flesh filled the air.
For a moment, there was silence. Then came a sound that Durotan had never thought to hear: cries of approval and delight at the sight of a bound foe dying in helpless torment.
Durotan stared in horror. Another prisoner was slain for "demonstration purposes." This one was beaten with a whip by one of the fairer servants of the shaman, standing transfixed while fire rained upon it, and darkness pummclcd it, A third was brought forward, its magical essence sucked out of it by a monstrous creature that looked like a deformed wolf with tentacles sprouting from its back.
Bile rose in Durotan's throat as blue blood and ashes covered what once had been sacred land, land that had been and was even now lush and fertile, though its profound sense of tranquility had been brutally violated. Here he had danced, had sung to the moon, had conspired with a boyhood friend, had courted his beloved. Here generations of ores had celebrated their unity on a place so holy that any fights that broke out had been halted immediately, the combatants ordered to make peace or to depart.
Durotan was no shaman. He could not sense the earth or the spirits, but he did not need to in order to feel their pain as his own.
Mother Kashur, surely, surely this is not what you wanted, he thought. The cheering filled his cars, the stench of blood and charred flesh assaulted his nostrils. Worst of all was the sight of his brethren, even some among his own clan, who were caught up in the frenzy of inflicting pain and torment upon beings who were rendered incapable of even spitting on their opponents.
He was dimly aware of his hand hurting. Somewhat in a daze, he looked down to see that Draka was clenching it so hard she threatened to break the bones.
"For the shaman!" cried someone.
"No!" Gul'dan's voice carried over the noise of the cheering crowd. "No longer are they shaman. They were abandoned by the elements-they will call them no longer and beg for their aid. Behold those who have power, and who are not afraid to wield it.
Behold , . . the warlocks!"
Durotan tore his gaze from his fingers entwining with his mate's to look up at the sacred mountain. It jutted serenely skyward as it ever had, its sides catching and reflecting the light, and for a long moment, Durotan wondered why it did not shatter and break, like the heart of a sentient being, overcome with horror at what was being done in its once-comforting shadow.
There were wild celebrations that night. Durotan participated in none of them and forbade members of his clan to do so. As the Frostwolf shaman sat by their small fire, subdued and eating in silence, Drek'Thar dared ask the question that Durotan knew was in their hearts.
"My chieftain," said Drek'Thar quicdy, "will you permit us to learn the ways of the warlocks?"
There was a long silence, unbroken save by the crackling of the fire. Finally
Durotan spoke.
"I have a question for you first." he said. "Do you approve of what was done to the prisoners today?"
Drek'Thar looked uncomfortable. "It . . . would be better had we attacked them in honest combat." he admitted. "But they are our enemies. They have proven that."
"Proven that they will fight back when attacked." Durotan retorted. "That is all that has been proven." Drek'Thar started to protest, but Durotan waved him to be silent. "I know, this is the will of the ancestors, but today I beheld something that I never thought I would sec. I saw the sacred fields where for countless years our people met in peace defiled by the blood of those who couldn't even lift a hand to defend themselves."
He saw movement at the edge of the circle and caught Orgrim's scent. Durotan continued. "In the shadow of Oshu'gun itself Those who slew the draenei today did not do so in order to protect an immediate threat to our lands. They butchered prisoners in order to show off their new . .. talents/'
Orgrim now coughed quietly and Durotan motioned him forward. Orgrim was well known to all present, and he sat down by the fire with the familiarity of one known and welcomed.
"Orgrim," Draka said, touching her friend's arm gently. "The first.. . warlocks . .. are from your clan. What are your thoughts?"
Orgrim stared into the firelight, his heavy brows knitted together as he sorted through his thoughts. "If we are to fight the draenei-and even you Frostwolves are resigned to the necessity of it-then we should fight to be victorious. The elements have abandoned the shaman. They are fickle and unpredictable at their best, and were never the most reliable allies. Not like one's friends."
He glanced at Durotan and smiled a little. Despite the heaviness in his chest, Durotan smiled back.
"These new creatures, these strange powers-they seem to be more dependable. And destructive."
"There was something about them...." Draka's voice trailed off. Drek'Thar broke in quickly.
"Draka, I know your concerns. They were definitely not natural powers, at least not natural as we shaman have always known them. But who is to say that is wrong? They exist, they must have some place in the order of things. Fire is fire. Whether it comes from the
fingers of a little dancing being or with the spirit of fire's blessing, it burns flesh just the same. I agree with our esteemed guest.
We have committed to the battle. Surely we do not fight to lose it!"
Draka still shook her head, her beautiful eyes unhappy. Her hands moved as if she were physically groping for the words.
"It is more than summoning fire, or even the strange bolts of darkness," she said. "I have fought draenei. I have slain draenei. And never have I seen them writhe in such pain, nor give voice to such torment. The things who are serving the warlocks seemed to . . .
enjoy that."
"We enjoy the hunt," Durotan pointed out. He disliked arguing with his mate, but as always, he needed to see all sides of an issue in order to decide what was best for his clan. "The wolves enjoy feasting on steaming flesh."
"Is it wrong to wish to win?" Orgrim challenged, his gray eyes narrowing. "Is it wrong to take pleasure in the victory?"
"In the hunt, in the victory, no. It is the suffering of which I speak."
Drek'Thar shrugged. "Perhaps the beings who are summoned to serve feed on that. Perhaps it is necessary to their existence."
"But is it necessary to ours?" Draka's eyes glittered in the firelight, and Durotan knew with a pang that it was not from anger but from tears of frustration. "The draenei have always had superior magics to ours, even with the aid of the elements." Drek'Thar said. "I have always been a shaman. I was born so. And now I tell you I will embrace the path of the warlock, if my clan leader will permit it. Because I understand what those powers can do for us, having dealt with the elements for as long as I have. I would say, Draka, I am sorry, but yes-yes-this is necessary to our existence. If we do not have the powers of the elements to call upon, the draenei will obliterate us from the face of the earth."
Draka sighed and buried her face in her hands. The small group was silent, the only sound the crackling of the fire. Durotan thought something was missing; now he knew. He did not hear the sounds of the night creatures, the birds and insects and other living things who formerly filled the air with quiet sounds. They had been driven from this place by what had occurred here earlier. He tried not to think of this as an omen.
"I will permit the Frostwolf clan to learn these arts," he said heavily.
Drek'Thar bowed his head. "I thank you, Durotan. You will not regret it."
Durotan did not reply.
Fourteen
Drek'Thar weeps as he tells me of these things, tears fallingfrom eyes tliat can no longer see the present but too keenly can see the past. I have no comfort to offer him. That the elements have come again to his call- to mine - indeed to that of any orcish shaman is testimony to their compassion and forgiveness, their desire to see the balance restored.
The Spire that still houses darkness is not on this continent. We are well away from its malevolence physically, but not yet out of its shadow. The shadow that was cast so long ago, on the day following the defiling of what had once been our most sacred place.
The shadow of a black hand.
Sleep did not come easily to Durotan. Nor, he realized, to Draka, as she tossed and turned and sighed. Finally he gave up and lay awake, going over die events of the day. Everything in him screamed that it was wrong to embrace a magical path that so blatantly throve on the suffering of another being. And yet, what else was there to do? The elements had deserted the shaman, even though the ancestors themselves had given the ores this task. Without magic to use as an additional weapon, the ores would be wiped out by the superior technology and knowledge of the draenei.
He rose and left the sleeping tent. He started a fire to shake off the predawn chill and silently ate cold raw meat. As he broke his fast and watched the sky lighten, he saw a courier approaching. Without stopping, the rider tossed a scroll to Durotan and rode on.
Durotan unfolded it and closed his eyes at the contents.
There was to be another meeting in two days. At that time, the chieftains would elect a leader who would speak for them all. Make decisions for them all. They would select one who would be called Warchief.
A soft hand stroked his hair. He looked up to see Draka reading over his shoulder.
"You might as well stay home," she said gruffly. "The outcome is decided anyway."
He smiled sadly at her. "You did not use to be so cynical, beloved."
"I did not use to live in such times,'' was all she said. In his heart, he knew she was right. There was only one orc who was well-known enough, charismatic enough to win sufficient votes to be elected Warchief. Grom Hcllscrcam might give Blackhand a bit of a challenge, but Hcllscrcam was too impulsive to be trusted
with such a task. Blackhand had been a visible figure from the very start, at first opposing and then supporting Ner'zhul. It was his shaman who had become the first warlocks. He had won more victories in his attacks against the draenei than anyone else.
Draka, as she was so often, was right in this as well. And two days later, Durotan watched with dull eyes as the votes of the clan chieftains were tallied, and as Blackhand of the Blackrock clan was chosen. He felt several glances come his way as Blackhand's name was announced by Gul'dan, and as the big orc stood and with false modesty accepted the title. Durotan did not even bother to object. What would be the point? He was already being watched closely for suspicion of disloyalty. No word he could possibly utter would change anything.
At one point, he looked over at Orgrim. To all other eyes, the second in command of the Blackrock clan looked steady and supportive of his leader. But Durotan knew Orgrim better than anyone, and he saw the slight frown that furrowed his friend's brow, the tightness around the lips that indicated that Orgrim was perhaps as unhappy with the decision as Durotan. But he, too, was in no position to object. Durotan hoped that perhaps Orgrim's position, so close to Blackhand, would help mitigate the damage he was certain Blackhand would do.
Blackhand now stood in front, waving and smiling at the cheering crowd. Durotan could not object, but ncithcr could he bring himself to cheer for an orc who exemplified everything he despised.
Orgrim stood behind his leader on Blackhand's right. Gul'dan. whom Durotan was certain was manipulating things but was unsure as to how, stood back and gazed at Blackhand respectfully.
"My orcish brothers and sisters!" Blackhand cried. "You honor me, I will prove a worthy Warchief of this vast sea of noble warriors. Day by day. we improve our weapons and our armor. And now, we reject the unpredictable elements and embrace true power-power that our warlocks control and wield without groveling or scraping to anyone or anything. This is liberation! This is strength! We are of one purpose, one clear focus. We will wipe the draenei from our lands. They will be unable to resist this tide of warriors and warlocks, this sweeping Horde. We are their worst night-marc. To battle!"
He lifted his arms and shouted, "For the Horde!"
And thousands of impassioned voices cried, "For the Horde! For the Horde! For the HorAeV
Durotan and Draka returned home shordy after the election of Blackhand, too disgusted to remain longer. The shaman stayed behind for training. When they returned several days later, Durotan saw they stood tall and proud once again. This new magic had given them back their faith in themselves- something that had evaporated like morning mist when the elements deserted them. For that, Durotan was grateful. He loved his clan, and knew them to be good people. He did not like seeing them broken and disheartened.
They practiced their skills on beasts at first, joining the hunting parties and sending their strange creatures after clefthoof and talbuk. Durotan was still troubled at the agony the attacked creatures suffered. As time passed, the creatures suffered less-not because the pain was decreased, but because the warlocks were learning to kill faster and more efficiently. The addition of the strange "helpers," or "pets," as some warlocks fondly referred to the beings firmly under their control, seemed to make alt the difference.
Blackhand seemed to enjoy his newfound position. Scrolls came almost daily from couriers whose wolves and whose selves seemed to wear more ornate adornment each time they rode into camp. Durotan had to admit that knowing what was going on with the other clans was useful information.
But one day, someone other than the courier came into the encampment. Durotan recognized the raiment; the approaching ore, mounted on a wolf with a particularly glossy black cloak, was one of Blackhand's personal warlocks, Kur'kul. He halted his wolf, dismounted, and bowed before Durotan.
"Chieftain, a word with you from the Warchief," he said in a surprisingly pleasant voice. Durotan nodded and motioned that the warlock walk with him. They strode until he felt certain they would not be overheard. "What is it, that Blackhand sends one of his most important warlocks to mc?" he asked.
Kur'kul smiled around his tusks. "I am riding to all the clans," he said, clearly intending for Durotan to be put in his place. The Frostwolves were not being particularly honored, it would seem. Durotan grunted and folded his arms across his chest, waiting.
"The most important factor in our eventual and glorious victory over the draenei is numbers," Kur'kul continued. "They are few, we are many. But we need to be more."
"So what is it Blackhand wishes?" growled Durotan. "Shall we leave off fighting for mating?"
Kur'kul did not blink. "Not leave off fighting, but yes . . . encourage your warriors to procreate. You will receive accolades for each child that is born to your clan. That will help. But unfortunately, we need more warriors right now, not six years from now."
Durotan stared, stunned. He had meant the comment as a crude joke. What was going on?
"Children begin training at age six," Kur'kul continued. "They are strong enough to fight at age twelve. Summon all your younglings."
"I do not understand," Durotan said. "Summon them for what?"
Kur'kul sighed as if Durotan were a foolish child, "I have the ability to accentuate their growth," he said. "We will. . . push them forward a bit. If we take all the children that are between six and twelve now and age
them to twelve, we will increase the numbers of warriors on the field by almost fifty percent."
Durotan couldn't believe what he was hearing. 'Absolutely not!"
"I'm afraid it's not a choice. It's an order. Any clan who refuses will be branded a traitor to the Horde. The clan will be exiled, and their leader and his mate ... executed."
Durotan stared, stunned. Kur'kul handed him a scroll. He read it, shaking with anger, and saw that the warlock had spoken truly.
He and Draka would be put to death, and the Frostwolf clan exiled.
"You would rob them of their childhood, then," he said stonily.
"For their future? Yes. I will drain a little of their lives . , . only six years' worth. They will come to no harm. The Blackrock children certainly didn't. Black-hand insisted his own three young ones be the first to be so honored. And in return, they will be able to fight for the glory of the Horde now, when they can make a difference."
Durotan was not in the least surprised that Black-hand had permitted this to be done to his children. For the first time, Durotan was grateful that there were so few children in his clan. There were only five of them older than six and younger than twelve. He again read the missive, feeling furious and sickened at the same time. These children ought to be able to simply be children. The warlock waited calmly. Finally. Durotan said in a voice he
made deliberately harsh to hide his pain, "Do what you must do."
"For the Horde!" said Kur'kul.
Durotan did not reply.
What happened next was barbaric.
Durotan forced himself to remain impassive while Kur'kul cast a spell on the five Frostwolf children. They writhed in pain, screaming and flailing on the earth as bones were stretched, as skin and muscle burst into unnatural growth. A sickly green line linked the children to the warlock, as if he was sucking the very life out of them. The expression on Kur'kul's face was ecstatic. If the children were suffering, he most definitely was not. For an awful moment, Durotan feared the warlock would not stop at age twelve, but would continue draining life from the children until they were shriveled and ancient.
But thankfully, Kur'kul did stop. The young ores- children no longer-lay where they had dropped the instant the draining had begun. For long moments, they could not be roused, and when they did, they wept, softly, brcathily, as if they no strength left for anything else.
Durotan turned toward the warlock. "You have done what you have come for. Get out."
Kur'kul looked offended. "Chieftain Durotan, you-"
Durotan seized him by the front of his scarlet robe. Fear flickered across the other ore's face.
"Get out. Now."
Durotan shoved hard and Kur'kul stumbled backward, almost falling. He glowered at Durotan.
"Blackhand will not be pleased to hear of this," Kur'kul growled. Durotan did not dare speak; if any other words came from his mouth, he knew they would
doom his clan. Instead he turned away, shaking with rage, and went to the children who were children no longer.
For some time after that, nothing was asked of the Frostwolf clan save more intensive training and reporting back on that training, and Durotan was both relieved and apprehensive. Somehow, he knew that when Blackhand and Gul'dan chose to notice him, the task they would set for him would be a difficult one.
He would not be disappointed.
Durotan was looking at a new pattern for armor the smith had just drawn up when the wolfridcr loped into the Frostwolf encampment. Without breaking stride, the rider tossed Durotan a parchment, wheeled his mount around, and departed. Durotan unrolled it and began to read, his eyes widening. He looked up quickly at the departing figure of the rider-it was not the official courier.
Old friend-
I am sure it comes as no surprise that you are being watched. They will set a task for you, one that they know you can complete.
You must do so. I do not know what they will do if you refuse, but I fear the worst.
There was no signature; the missive did not need one. Durotan knew Orgrim's bold script. He crumpled the parchment and tossed it into the fire, watching it twist and curl in on itself like a living thing as the flames licked and consumed it.
Orgrim had sent the warning just in time. That very afternoon, a rider wearing the official tabard of a courier approached and handed the Frostwolf chieftain a parchment. Durotan nodded as he accepted it and put it aside. He did not want to see it right now.
But the courier looked uneasy. She did not dismount, but neither did she turn
her wolf and ride back to the Frostwolf lands.
"I have been instructed to wait for a reply," she said after an awkward pause.
Durotan nodded and unrolled the parchment. The writing was exquisite, and he knew that Blackhand had dictated the missive; the Warchief, smart and cunning though he was, was barely literate.
It was worse than he had thought. Durotan kept his face carefully neutral, though out of the corner of his eye he saw that Draka was watching him carefully.
Unto Durotan, son of Garad, chieftain of the Frostwolf clan, Blackhand, Warchief of the Horde, gives greetings.
You have now had time to see the skills of our newly trained warlocks in action. It is time to take the attack to our enemies. The draenei city of Telmor is close to your borders. You are instructed to form a war party and attack them. Orgrim has told me that as boys, the two of you entered that city. That you saw the secret of how the draenei kept themselves unseen. Orgrim also tells me that you have excellent recall and that you would remember how to expose the city to our warriors for an assault.
I'm sure I don't have to tell you what destroying this city would mean to the Horde. And to the Frostwolf dan. Reply to this letter immediately and we will begin preparations for the assault.
For the Horde!
The signature was an imprint of Blackhand's right hand, stained with ink.
Durotan was furious. How could Orgrim have revealed this information? Did he truly follow Blackhand after all, that he would tell the Warchief of this incident and so put Durotan on the spot? The anger ebbed as he realized that the information to which Blackhand referred-their visit there as boys, the way the city was hidden, Durotan's almost uncanny memory-these were things that could have been dropped in conversation at any point over the last
few years. Blackhand was intelligent enough to pick up any crumb of information, and hoard it until such time as it was necessary. Durotan thought about lying, about claiming that he could not recall the words by which Restalaan had dispelled the illusion that kept die draenei city safe and hidden from the eyes of the ogres . . . and. now, the eyes of the ores. It had been a long time, and he had only heard the phrase uttered once. Anyone else would indeed have forgotten it. But the threat in die letter was so thinly veiled as to be almost ridiculous. If Durotan agreed to assist with the attack, he would prove his loyalty to the Horde, to Blackhand, and to Gul'dan. at least for the moment. If he refused, even if he claimed not to recall the words Blackhand wanted him to speak . . . well, like Orgrim, Durotan feared the worst.
The courier was waiting.
Durotan made the onlv decision he could make.
J He looked up at the courier, his face impassive. "I will do as the Warchief bids, of course. For the Horde!"
The courier looked both relieved and a little surprised. "The Warchief will be pleased to hear this. I am instructed to give you the following." She reached into her leather backpack and retrieved a small sack, which she handed to Durotan. "Your warriors and your warlocks will need to train with these."
Durotan nodded. He knew what they were: the Heart of Fury and the Brilliant Star that he had ordered taken off Velen. These stones were perhaps the only things that had spared him once before when he had incurred Ner'zhul's anger. Now, he would use them against the very people he had taken them from.
"The Warchief will contact you soon," the courier said, inclined her head, and turned her wolf. Durotan watched her go. Draka stepped quietly beside him. He handed her the letter and went into their tent.
A few moments later she joined him, slipping her arms around him from behind while he buried his face in his hands and grieved over the events that had led to the terrible decision he had been forced to make.
A few days later the war party gathered at the Frostwolf encampment. Most of the warriors and warlocks were from the Blackrock clan, but there were more than a few painted Warsong faces in the crowd, and several Shattered Hand as well. Even the most obtuse among the Frostwolves could sense the mistrust and contempt from the visitors. Durotan knew it was no accident that the other ores were all from the most martial clans. They were there to make sure the Frostwolves did not falter at any critical point.
Durotan idly wondered which among them had the instructions to slit his throat at the first sign of hesitation. He hoped it was not Orgrim, The two old friends exchanged only a few words, and Durotan saw regret in Orgrim's visage. For that, at least, he was glad.
A courier had been sent ahead, so there were plenty of bonfires roaring and food and drink for the hungry "guests," Many of the Frostwolves gave up their own lodging for the visitors, so that those who would head into battle the following morning would rest as well as possible. Durotan met with Orgrim and the others who would lead the assault, sketching out a layout of the city as best he and Orgrim could recall it.
By daybreak, the war party-a small army of ores- was on the move. They passed into the meadows that surrounded the
Terokkar forest, where so long ago Orgrim and Durotan had raced as youths and been startled by the appearance of an ogre.
No lumbering giants troubled the vast wave of ores as they moved steadily toward their destination this morning. Durotan was in the front, riding beside Orgrim on Nightstalkcr. They were silent, but Durotan did not miss the fact that Orgrim's gray eyes lingered on the site where two boys had been rescued by draenei warriors.
"The years have been long since we passed this way," Durotan said.
Orgrim nodded. "I am not even sure we have the right direction. The forest and fields have changed and grown, and there were precious few landmarks originally-''
Durotan said heavily, "I remember the way." He wished he did not. A pile of stones here, a strange-shaped outcropping there was enough to guide him. It looked like nothing to anyone else. Blackhand had told his troops that the draenei were able to disguise their city. Even so, Durotan's sharp cars caught slight murmurings of concern. He frowned.
"We are drawing close," he said. "We must be quiet.
There is an excellent chance that We will have been seen and reported already."
The war party grew silent then. With a few gestures, Orgrim dispatched some of his outriders to scout the area. Durotan's mind went back to that twilight, when he, too, was worried about where they were going and what the draenei had planned for him.
He brought his wolf to a halt and dismounted. Nightstalkcr shook his head and scratched his cars absently. It was here ... or close to here. . . . Durotan felt a desperate hope that perhaps the draenei remembered that they had exposed their secret to him, that they had changed the hiding place of the magical stone upon which their protection depended.
There was no telltale rock beneath which the green gem was secreted. Durotan's memory would have no aid in uncovering it. He concentrated, walking slowly, hearing the jangling of tack and the soft clinking of armor as the others watched and waited. He closed his eyes to aid his concentration, saw again Restalaan kneeling on the ground, moving aside leaves and pine needles to uncover-
Durotan opened his eyes and moved a few steps to his left. He said a quick prayer to the ancestors; whether it was asking for help in finding the stone or in not finding it, he was not certain. Mailed hands reached down and brushed away layers of detritus and then touched something cool and hard.
There is no turning back now. Durotan closed his fingers around the gem and picked it up.
Even in his distraught state of mind, he could sense the stone emanating a comforting energy. It nestled in his palm as if it belonged there. Durotan ran his left index finger over it, drawing out this moment before everything would change irrevocably
"You found it." breathed Orgrim. who had silently stepped up to his friend. Durotan was overcome with emotion and could not speak for a moment. He merely nodded, then tore his gaze from the beautiful, pulsating stone and looked up at the awestruck faces gazing at the treasure he held.
Orgrim nodded brusquely. "Get into position," he said, "We have been fortunate that there has been no advance warning."
The stone was so calming to hold, Durotan wanted nothing better than to simply stand and look into its depths, but he knew that he had already made his choice. He took a deep breath and spoke the words that Restalaan had spoken so long ago in this same place.
"Kehla men samir, solay Uimaa kahl."
He wanted to believe that his thick, orcish accent would not activate the stone. That he was able to fulfill his obligation to his people without storming a small city full of civilians. But apparently the words were understood by whatever force controlled the green gem. The illusion was already dissipating, the trees and boulders shimmering into insubstantiality, and before the orcish war party a wide, paved road stretched as if in invitation.
They needed no urging. The glorious city of the draenei lay before them, and with cries torn from over a
hundred throats, the ores descended upon it.
Fifteen
Drek'Thar speaks in a broken voice of glories ruined, of beauty destroyed, of the slaughter of children. Through his tale runs the unspoken excuse: It seemed so right at the time. / imagine it did seem right. It did seem just. I can only pray to the ancestors that I am never placed in the same position as my father-torn between what I know in my heart is right and the defense of my people. It is why I continue to strive to uphold the tenuous peace between us and the Alliance.
Because few offenses and insults in this or any other world are sufficient to warrant the slaughter of children.
Later, Durotan would wonder how the city of Telmor had received no advance notice of a wave of mounted ores. He would never be able to speak with a draenei to find out. He could only assume that the draenei were so certain in their Hlusionary camouflage that the idea that it could be breached never occurred to them.
The quiet air was rent with the sound of war cries and wolf howls as the riders stormed the streets of the city. Several unarmed draenei were cut down in the first few seconds of the assault. The white pavement was soon blue with spilled blood, but it did not take very long for the city guards to counterattack.
Durotan had shoved the stone into his pack the moment he had finished using it; it would join the red and yellow stones he had taken from Velen. He mounted quickly and rode with grim determination, his axe at the ready. While he had made his own private vow that he would not attack an unarmed foe or a child, he had also made his choice, and was prepared to kill or die for it.
The first wave flooded the city. A river of ores forked into streams, pouring into the large, spherical public buildings that branched off to cither side of the
main street, surging up the wide stone steps. The warlocks brought up the rear. Their creatures were silent and obedient, save the small ones that muttered constantly under their breaths. They waited for the right moments to bring down the rain of fire, the bolt of shadows, the various curses of torment. The warriors emerged covered with blood, their boots tracking it down the wide steps as they continued on to the next building, and the next.
The draenei guards were in the streets now, casting their own magics. Durotan turned in his saddle barely in time to deflect a blow from a sword that blazed with blue energy. The sword clanged against the head of his axe and jarred his arm to the bone. But that was nothing compared to the shock he felt at recognizing his attacker.
For the second time, he and Restalaan were meeting in battle, Durotan had spared Velen, and in return. Restalaan had spared him when he was helpless before the draenei warrior. Durotan saw recognition in the other's eyes, then those glowing blue orbs narrowed.
All debts between them were paid. This time, there would be no quarter given, on cither side.
Restalaan cried something in his musical tongue. Instead of attacking again, he hauled Durotan from his saddle. Durotan was taken by surprise, and before he knew what was happening, he lay on the ground before his enemy. He reached for his axe as Restalaan swung his sword, thinking even as his fingers closed about the hilt that he would not be swift enough.
Nightstalkcr, however, was trained almost as well as the orc who rode him. The instant the wolf felt his rider leave his back he whirled on Restalaan. Huge teeth crunched down on the draenei's arm. Had it not been for the protective armor Restalaan wore, his arm would have been severed instantly. As it was, the pressure was enough to cripple him and make him drop the sword. With a grunt, Durotan swung his axe as hard as he could. It slammed into Restalaan's midsection, its keen edge cleaving through ihc armor to bite deep into his flesh.
Restalaan fell to his knees, his useless arm still held fast by Nightstalkcr's
teeth. The white wolf bit down harder, growling, and started worrying the draenei's
arm as if it were a small animal. Within moments, the wolf would rip it off. Blood gushed from the wound in Restalaan's side. He made no sound despite the agony he must be enduring.
Durotan got to his feet and struck again, this time a killing blow-a mercy blow. Restalaan sagged and Nightstalkcr immediately let go of the arm. The captain of the guards of Telmor was dead.
Durotan did not permit himself regret. He mounted Nightstalkcr quickly and sought out his next target. There was no lack of them.
The city was certainly not the size of Shattrath, their capital, but it was big enough. There were draenei aplenty to slaughter. The air was filled with cries of bioodlust, of pain and fear, of the clanging of sword on shield and the crackle of spells being cast. Odors assaulted his nostrils, of blood and feces and urine and the unmistakable, unique reck of terror.
The rage boiling inside him felt good. His senses had never been higher, and he seemed to move without thinking. Over there-
another one of the guards, fighting Orgrim. Durotan tensed, thinking to rush to his friend's aid, but the Doomhammer swung through the air and crushed the attacker's skull even through his helm. Durotan grinned fiercely. Orgrim needed no aid.
He sensed the presence at his side before he heard or smcllcd it, and turned, bellowing his clan's war cry. He hoisted the gore-covered axe and prepared to bring it down. The child was barely out of puberty, but she screamed in fury as she tore with bare hands at his ar-morcd leg. Tears streamed down her pale blue face and her teeth were bared. Blue blood, too much of it to be her own, saturated her dress so that it clung to her body. She pounded futilely at him, her tear-filled eyes burning with pain and righteous fury
For a horrible second she seemed to be the same girl that Durotan and Orgrim had encountered years ago. That could not be-
surely that girl was a woman grown now. Or was she? But it did not matter. It was a female child who, both bravely and stupidly, was attempting to attack a mounted orc warrior with her bare hands.
It was with an enormous effort that Durotan halted the axe in mid-swing. He would not harm a child-that was not the code, that was not the way of the ores-
Suddenly the girl froze. Her eyes widened. She opened her mouth and blood gushed forth, Durotan's gaze dropped from her face to her chest, and he could see the spear point tenting the blood-soaked fabric. Before Durotan could react, the Shattered Hand orc who had slain the girl shoved the spear to the side, forcing the body to the earth. He put one booted foot on her shoulder.
Grunting, he pulled loose his spear and grinned up at Durotan.
"You owe me one, Frostwolf," the orc said, then vanished into the closepressing crowd of slayers and victims.
Durotan threw back his head and cried his agony to the ancestors.
On surged the orcs,leaving corpses in their wake. The vast majority of the dead were draenei, but here and there a brown body of a fallen orc could be seen. Some of the ores who fell yet lived, crying out for aid, but their pleas fell on deaf cars. Shaman could have healed them with spells, but apparently, warlock magics did not embrace the healing arts. So they lay where they had fallen, some wheezing out their last breaths next to the draenei they had slain, while the unstoppable tide poured forward.
They followed the road through the foothills, entering each building as they went and slaughtering anyone they found. No doubt some draenei had hidden, Durotan thought, and prayed they would not be found. He did not think that prayer would be answered.
Once the first round of slaughter had been completed, there would be the looting and the search for those who had escaped the first assault. He knew. It had been planned thus.
They had reached the largest building yet, the one that sat highest on the mountain, and Durotan recognized it immediately. It was the magistcr's scat, where he and Orgrim had had dinner with the Prophet. Bitterly he thought that Velen was not much of a prophet if he had not foreseen this black moment. Nightstalkcr raced up the steps, and Durotan could not help himself. He craned his neck and looked over his shoulder, back down toward the city as he had done the first time he had climbed these steps on his own two feet.
Then, the draenei city had been spread out like jewels on a meadow. Now. it looked exactly like what it was-a broken, taken city, spattered with blood and gore and the death not just of its citizens, but of any hope of peace or truce or negotiation. Durotan closed his eyes briefly in pain.
/ am proud of my people and our city, Restalaan had said to Durotan. Restalaan. who lay dead and stiffening on the white street along with countless other draenei. We have worked hard here. We love Draenor. And I never thought to have the chance to share it with an ore. The ways of destiny are strange indeed.
Stranger than cither orc youth or draenei guard could have imagined.
The rooms that had made two orc youths feel slightly penned in years ago now seemed utterly claustrophobic when crammed with adult orc warriors by the dozens. Most were empty; there had been time for an evacuation of all but those who had sworn to die in service to their city. And die they did, the guards who attacked them now. The beautiful, ornate furniture was used as weapons, brought crashing down upon draenei heads, the breakage adding to the thrill of the fight. Ores punched holes in the smooth, curving walls for the sheer pleasure of it. Beds were hacked with swords, bowls of fruit and delicately wrought statuettes swept off furniture that was in turn smashed by axe or hammer.
Durotan had had enough. "Hold!" he cried, but no one listened. The creatures
controlled by the warlocks seemed well pleased with this behavior, almost smug. But the time for destruction had passed, and the ruthless savagery would not serve the ores now that all the inhabitants of Telmor were cither slain or had fled.
"Hold!" Durotan yelled again. This time Orgrim heard him and took up the cry. The Warsong representative also shook his head, as if to clear it of something hazy and obscuring, then he, too. tried to calm his warriors. Drek'Thar, back with the other warlocks, had not become as lost in bloodlust as the others, and he was able to stop the others from casting spells.
"Listen to me!" Durotan roared. Most of them had reached the room where Velen had hosted them at his table. The room was empty, die chairs and tables overturned, the wall hangings shredded and cast to the floor.
"We have taken the city, it is now time to take what we need from it!"
They were listening now, their breaths coming in pants that filled the room with raspy sound. But at least they had stopped swinging their weapons at anything that moved ... or even anything that didn't.
"First we attend to the injured," Durotan ordered. "We will not leave our brethren to suffer in the streets."
Some of them started guiltily at that. Durotan realized with disgust that many of these warriors had completely forgotten that some of their number still lay writhing in pain outside while they enjoyed die wanton destruction of the magister's estate. He pushed his feelings down and nodded to Drek'Thar. The warlocks might no longer have healing spells, but they had once been shaman, and knew how to tend battle wounds in a more mundane fashion. Drek'Thar motioned to several warlocks, and they hurried back the way they had come.
"Next, this city has supplies the likes of which we have never seen. There are foodstuffs aplenty, and weapons, and armor, and other things we know not of. Things that will serve the Horde in its quest to-"
He could not say the words he had planned: In its quest to wipe out the draenei. Instead he added somewhat awkwardly, "In its quest. We are an army. An army marches on its stomach. We need to be well led, well watered, healed, rested, protected.
Orgrim-you take a group and start at this end. Guthor, you take a group and head back to the gates. Work your way up the main road until you meet Orgrim's group. Anyone who has any healing knowledge, report to Drek'Thar and do exactly what he tells you to do."
"What of any draenei we find alive?" asked someone.
What, indeed? There was no infrastructure to take care of prisoners, and in truth, the only purpose of a prisoner would be for negotiations. Since it had been made quite clear that the sole purpose of the Horde was total extermination of the draenei race, there was no reason to host prisoners.
"Kill them." Durotan said hoarsely. He hoped the raggedness of his voice would be interpreted as raw fury rather than the agonizing pain it was. "Kill them all."
As the ores he commanded hurried to obey his orders, Durotan found himself wishing that Nightstalkcr had not been so quick to protect him. It would have been easier had he perished by Restalaan's hand this day than speak the words he had just uttered.
With any luck, during this horrific campaign to obliterate a species who had never raised a hand to them, death
would find Durotan sooner rather than later.
Sixteen
The Shadow Council. Even now, so many years on, we know so little about who they were and what they did. Gul'dan carried many, many secrets to his grave. May he rot there in torment. It is difficult enough for me to understand how one or two may become so corrupted that they would doom their descendants for power in their lifetimes; that there were so many- the number is not even known for certain- is beyond the scope of my limited imagination.
Yet even these numbers would not have mattered had it not been for the demons who held them in their grasp. Their pain, I rejoice in; what they did to others who obeyed them because they trusted them, I condemn with every fiber of my being.
"That was an excellent test," Kil'jaeden approved, smiling at his subjects, Gul'dan bowed, his eyes bright with his master's approval. Ner'zhul hunkered down, his eyes on the floor. But even so. he was listening.
"I confess. I was surprised Durotan was able to carry out our orders," Gul'dan said. "I expected him to resist, or at least put shackles on what his ores could and could not do. But the city lies claimed and broken, my lord. All the draenei who once lived there are gone- most of them dead."
"'Most' is not good enough. Gul'dan. You know that."
Gul'dan flinched slightly at the criticism. He wondered, not for the first time, about the connection between Kil'jaeden and the draenei. and why the Beautiful One so despised them. "It was our first attempt at taking the battle to them, rather than attacking lone hunting parties. Great One." the warlock replied, a little surprised at his own daring. Kil'jaeden cocked his horned red head, considered, then nodded.
"True. And there is yet time."
It had been several days since the fall of Telmor. Gul'dan, impressed with the job Durotan had done, had tried to give the city to the Frostwolf clan as a reward, but Durotan had declined the offer. The Frostwolves, he stated, would continue to live in their ancestral lands.
The Blackrocks. however, had not been so foolish. Blackhand and his family now slept in the beds where the magistcr of the city had once slept. At first, the ores had not known what to make of the trappings of the draenei, but now they were beginning to incorporate their victims' way of life into their own. They sat in chairs, ate at tables, analyzed and trained with draenei weaponry, adapted the armor for bulkier orcish frames. Some of the females and not a few of the males of the Blackrock clan had taken to wearing draenei clothing, incorporating it with traditional orcish tunics, robes, and breeches,
Gul'dan knew that many wondered why he or Ner'zhul had not taken the city for themselves. It was tempting, but Gul'dan had been well advised by his master. Creature comforts were pleasant, but power was sweeter, and the less Gul'dan claimed for himself publicly, the greater his reach would be in secret. Kil'jaeden would not let him down, as long as Gul'dan did his master's work well. A few items were brought to this new place he called home-an enormous, circular table carved of wood inlaid with softly glowing shells and stones, along with several beautiful chairs,
Gul'dan stepped forward to the massive table, running his hands over the polished surface, smiling to himself. All that remained was to summon those whom Gul'dan had reason to believe would answer. Some names were immediately obvious to him. Others came only with extended thought. But he had a list of names now that was long enough to be comprehensive, should enough to be
. .. managed.
Soon, sooner that he had even hoped, the Shadow Council would form. While on the outside. Gul'dan was advancing the ores as a race, giving them power and eliminating the "enemy" that was the draenei, a
handful of ores almost as corrupt and power hungry as he would pull the
strings.
It was not about the ores as a race.
It had never been about the ores as a race.
It was about power-getting it, wielding it, and keeping it. Ner'zhul had never understood that. He liked the power, but was not willing to feed it the meat it craved. The end Kil'jaeden demanded.
Deceit, lies, manipulation-even Blackhand, who thought he was initiated into Gul'dan's ultimate schemes, hadn't grasped the vastness of Gul'dan's ambitions. It was as huge as Kil'jaeden's desire to destroy the draenei. It was as enormous as the sky. as deep as the oceans, and knife-sharp as hunger.
Gul'dan looked at Ner'zhul with contempt as the older orc who had once been a mentor sat huddled in a corner. His gaze traveled to the blazing eyes of Kil'jaeden, and the great being nodded.
"Summon them." Kil'jaeden said. His lips parted in a smile, showing sharp white teeth. "They will come when you call. And they will dance to your tune. I will see to that."
Allies.
They needed allies.
Gul'dan wondered how Kil'jaeden had not foreseen this. The orcs were mighty indeed, especially when controlled and directed properly. The long months, over a year now, that this war had stretched had only made them more so. Their best brains had gotten to work on understanding the technology of the draenei as best they could. Building had begun on a center fortress, which Gul'dan called the Citadel, where a standing army could be conveniently quartered, trained, and equipped. The ores had never before attempted anything like this, and Gul'dan was proud that he had suggested the idea. There were warriors, there were shaman-now, of course, warlocks- there were healers, there were craftsmen. The first three had clear roles and
no lack of opportunity to perform their duties. The craftsmen were contributing on a different level, creating the armor and weapons and buildings to support those who had the glory of slaughtering draenei until their bodies were sticky with spilled blood.
Some would call these laborers a lower class of ore. Privately, Gul'dan felt that way himself. But he was wise enough to know that their work, while hardly glamorous or likely to gain them recognition, was as necessary as a warrior's willingness to kill or a warlock's mastery of curses. Those who provided food, shelter, weapons-the warriors and warlocks would not get very far without them. So Gul'dan had made a show of praising the craftsmen, the pleasant result being that they were inspired to work harder and continually improve.
But even though every member of every clan was working as hard as he could-and Gul'dan had spies in each clan to make
certain of it-it was not going to be
enough. The taking of Telmor had been surprisingly easy, and the boost to morale was tremendous. But Gul'dan knew that the Horde's victory was largely due to luck. No one in that sheltered city believed for a moment they would be discovered and overrun in a matter of a few hours. They had thought themselves completely and utterly safe, protected by the magic of the green stone Gul'dan had dubbed Leafshadow, which shielded them first from ogre eyes and then from orcish. That easy victory would not be repeated. How would-
"Ogres," he said aloud, thoughtfully. He tapped one sharp-nailed finger against his jutting chin. "Ogres. . ."
"Absolutely not!" cried Blackhand. He dosed the distance between himself and Gul'dan in two strides, towering over the smaller ore. It took every ounce of bravado Gul'dan had not to retreat from that fearsome face shoved to within an inch of his.
"Come now. Blackhand," Gul'dan soothed. "Calm yourself and listen to what
I am saying. You will be the one to benefit most from this, after all."
That got him. Blackhand growled, snorted, and stepped back. Gul'dan did his best not to look obviously relieved.
"They are filth," Blackhand grunted. "They have long been enemies of the ores. Longer than the draenei, and with better reason.
How is it that I will benefit?" Getting right to the point, Gul'dan thought with satisfaction. He had judged Blackhand properly.
"There are some who still mutter that you were not elected fairly." Gul'dan said. "If you succeed in this, it will only add more glory to your name."
Blackhand's eyes narrowed. "Perhaps," he admitted. "But will the ores agree to this?"
Gul'dan permitted himself a smile. "They will if we tell them to," he replied,
Blackhand threw his head back and roared with laughter.
Orgrim shifted uneasily in his saddle as he glanced at his leader. When Blackhand had explained what he wanted to do, Orgrim had erupted in protest. He had joined in countless hunting parties over the years to eliminate the ogre threat. More than most orcs,with him it was personal. He had never ceased hating the fact that years ago, he had fled from one of the giant, lumbering, thick-skulled creatures. And now Blackhand proposed this.
But Orgrim knew that whatever else his leader was-and he was many things that Orgrim did not like-he was a good strategist.
The plan was sound, if one could detach oneself emotionally from it. So he had agreed to lend his support.
Obtaining information had been tricky. The Blackrocks had captured three of the ogres and spent many a long night speaking in sufficiently small words to get their point across before the deceptively pudgy things
understood what Theywanted and began to cooperate. Now every warrior, warlock, and healer from the entire enormous clan stood prepared for battle.
The ogres had told them where their masters lurked and led them to this place -an opening at the foot of the Blade's Edge mountain chain. They had made no attempt to hide themselves. Refuse littered the area outside, and there were plenty of large bare ogre footprints going in and out. Even as Orgrim watched, he saw a small group of ogres trundling out into the daylight. No doubt, they thought themselves safe, as the draenei in Telmor had before them; and no doubt, a year ago, they would have been right. But much had changed since then. The ores were no longer groups of scattered clans, but a unified fighting force willing to put aside an old grudge for a new hatred.
Blackhand was in front, flanked by the three ogres. Behind him were his sons. Rend and Maim, who spoke to one another in low voices punctuated by the occasional rough giggle. Orgrim had been against allowing the boys to fight at first, but they had proven to be stronger and better than one might think. They lacked their father's cunning, but they certainly had inherited his bloodthirst.
Grisclda, too, had been trained to fight, but she was not a natural the way the bovs were. Their
J J
names were appropriate. Their father shot them an angry look and they sobered at once.
Orgrim wondered if Blackhand would make a speech. He hoped not. Blackhand was at his best in action, not words, and his clan was more than ready to follow him. To his relief, Blackhand looked over the sea of warriors, nodded once, and then gave the order to attack.
The first wave charged, screaming wildly and pouring down the side of the foothills where Theyhad hidden. At first the ogres were so confused at the sight of three of their own allying with the ores that they simply stood and let themselves be slaughtered.
Then, as their slow brains began to comprehend that they were under attack, they rallied. They still did not attack their fellow ogres, who lumbered through their ranks to talk to the head of the guards stationed somewhere inside die cavern.
Orgrim was determined to enjoy the last authorized ogre-killing he was likely to taste, and swung the Doomhammer with
something akin to glee. His wolf was swift, and darted easily between the tree-trunk-thick legs of the ogre who raged impotently and swung his club as fiercely as he could. He recalled how big they had seemed to him as a child. They were still big, but so was he, now, and he wielded a legendary weapon with control and skill. He fractured the shin-bone of the ogre and it roared in agony.
Orgrim's wolf danced out of the way as the huge thing fell, making the earth tremble as it landed. It tried to get up, pushing its bulk off the ground with its large, fat hands, but by then other Blackrocks had swarmed upon it. Faster even than Orgrim could reckon, the ogre was dead and bleeding from over two dozen wounds.
Orgrim wheeled just in time to see one of the orcish warriors hurtling through the air. dead from a single blow from an ogre's massive club. Growling. Orgrim gathered himself to charge the murdering creature when a cry of "Hold, hold!" brought him up short.
It was testament to the power of Blackhand's personality that even now, even when most of the Blackrocks were caught in the grip of bloodlust and killing an ancient enemy, they stayed their hands. The ogres didn't, at least not at once, and Orgrim found himself riding away from the battle until the slow ogre brains understood what was going on. The thought galled him. It is for the good of all of us, Orgrim, he told himself.
He glanced over to see the ogres the Blackrocks had befriended talking to their kind. Or, rather, bellowing at them and occasionally smacking them. But at least the ogres had been distracted from following the retreating ores and appeared to be listening. One of them, bigger and wearing something that
looked like an official sash of some sort, actually seemed to have a brain. Orgrim could not understand the vile things and used the pause to catch his breath and gulp some water.
"Can't wait till we can kill them again," Rend said. Orgrim glanced at his chieftain's eldest son.
"If we succeed, they'll be Fighting alongside us," Orgrim replied. "You won't be allowed to kill them."
Maim spat. "Heh. Right. Kill 'cm on the sly."
Orgrim grimaced. He himself would like nothing better, but.. . "Several are dead already trying to make this plan of your father's work- He wouldn't like you undermining his efforts."
Rend sneered at him. "Who's going to tell him?"
"I will. If this works, and they listen to us-if any of them turn up dead, yours are the first names I'll mention."
Rend glowered. Right now, he was so young that it looked like childish petulance, but inwardly. Orgrim was touched with foreboding. He had never liked Blackhand. and liked his children, with the exception of little Grisclda. even less. He did not know if it was their parentage or their forced growth that was responsible, but there was a darkness in them that Orgrim mistrusted. One day, if they survived and began using their brains in addition to their powerful muscles. Rend and Maim would grow up to be even more dangerous and deadly than their father.
"I told you he wouldn't listen. Rend." Maim said petulantly. "Old man's forgotten what it's like to have bloodlust running through him. Let's go."
With a final sneer. Rend followed his brother. Orgrim sighed. He had bigger problems than two upstart youngsters right now. He turned his attention back to the negotiations, although he doubted the ogres would have understood the word. The attacks appeared to have stopped. Blackhand, who had fled the
battlefield as he had told alt his clan to do, now directed his wolf back down to where the ogres were gathered. Orgrim rode to his chieftain's side, arriving just in time to hear
the leader of the guard announce. "We no like gronn. Gronn hurt us."
He beckoned to one of the other ogres who turned to show his back to Orgrim and Blackhand. Orgrim saw that there were scars crisscrossing the ogre's back. He felt no twinge of pity for the creature; they had done worse to the orcs for decades. Still, it was useful to know. The captured ogres had also spoken of such things, and now they nodded as if they were terribly wise.
"What you give us if we join you?" demanded the guard.
Blackhand grinned up at the thing. "Well, for one thing, we won't beat you." Orgrim thought of Blackhand's own sons, but said nothing. "We'll see to it that you're fed and given appropriate weapons." Orgrim was relieved that Blackhand hadn't promised armor; three ores could be armored out of the materials that would protect a single ogre. And, fortunately, the guard- obviously one of the more intelligent of the ogres-still wasn't smart enough to think of armor himself.
"You'll have food, and shelter, and the delight of smashing draenei to small wet stains on the grass."
The other ogres had been listening intently, and now one of them literally jumped up and down with delight, "Me smash!" it roared gleefully, and several others took up the simple but apparently highly entertaining phrase. Blackhand waited for their enthusiasm to die down before continuing. "So, are We agreed?"
The ogre captain nodded. "No more hurting of ogres," he growled, and turned to regard those he led. His tiny eyes were shiny with tears, and this time, as he looked upon the ogres whose backs were crawling with scars, Orgrim did feel a little sorry for them. A very little.
"What is your name?" Orgrim asked the captain suddenly. It shifted its gaze
to him,
"Krol," he said.
"Krol, then," said Blackhand quickly before his second could say more. "When do you think We should lead our combined assault?"
"Now," Krol said, and before cither Orgrim or Blackhand could protest, he bellowed something in his hideous native tongue. The other ogres jumped up and down, and the earth shook as they landed. Then they all turned and purposefully reentered the cave mouth. Blackhand cast a glance over at Orgrim, who shrugged. He suspected it was easier to stop the tide than this flood of stupid, single-minded giants.
"Call them," Blackhand said. Orgrim produced a clefthoof's single horn and blew on it. The ores cried out in delight and began to again descend in response.
There was no time to remind the Blackrock clan of the plan. Orgrim hoped they would remember it, especially the ovcrzcalous Maim and Rend. Slaughter of ogres aplenty awaited them, but they had damned well better be killing the rig/it ogres.
Because if they didn't, if they gave the ogres any reason to question this sudden and very peculiar alliance, then the babes and old males and females who awaited word at the encampment might be all that remained of the Blackrock clan.
Orgrim was not optimistic. The Blackrock clan had ever been fierce in the hunt. Blackhand was little more than a cunning savage, and Orgrim had not failed to observe that recendy, a sort of manic fury had begun to creep through all the clans. As he whirled his wolf around to charge into the cave with his fellow clan members, he wondered if perhaps his eyes were playing tricks on him.
Surely the greenish tinge on the skins of the ores next to him was nothing more than a trick of the light.
Seventeen
Home, Whatever race you are, it is a word, a concept, that makes the heart swell with longing. Home can be ancient ancestral lands, or a new place that one has made one's own. Home can even be found in the eyes of the beloved. But we all need it, yearn for it, know that without a home of some sort we are incomplete.
For many years, each clan had its own home. Its own sacred lands, its own spirits of earth, air, water, fire, and spirit of the wilds.
The uprooting began and continued, each more shattering than the last, until we came to Kalimdor. Here, I
nd a home for a wandering people. A place of rest and sanctuary, where we could regroup and rebuild.
Home, for me, is now named for my father: the land of Durotar.
Durotan lifted his head and sniffed the wind. The scent that filled his nostrils was one of dust and desiccation.
fou
an acrid sort of odor. Not the smell of something burning, not quite, but similar. Once, Drek'Thar would have been able to catch the scent even better than he. but those days had passed. He was no longer a shaman, but a warlock. The air would not waft to him when asked, bearing information as detailed as if it had been written on a piece of parchment. And worse. Drek'Thar. along with the other warlocks of the Frostwolf clan, did not particularly seem to care.
There had been no rain for some time, and the summer seemed hotter than usual. It was the second summer in a row that rains had come scantily, if at all, and on a whim Durotan knelt and dug his fingers into the soil. Once, it
had been fertile loam, dark brown and emitting a rich earthy scent. Now, his fingers plunged easily into the dust. Its crust crumbled beneath his fingers, yielding instantly to dissolve into sand that would not hold grasses or crops, would not hold anything. It sifted through his fingers like water.
He sensed Draka's approach, but did not turn around. Her arms slipped about his waist from behind and she pressed against him.
They stood like that, for a long moment, then with a final squeeze she released him and stepped around to face him. Durotan dusted off his hands.
"We have never relied that much on what we could grow anyway," he said quietly.
Draka regarded him with her dark, knowing eyes. His heart ached to look at her. In so many ways, she was better than he. But she was the mate of the chieftain, not the chieftain, and she did not have to make the choices he did.
The choices he had.
"We have depended upon what We could hunt, mostly," Draka said. "But the animals We hunt survive on what the earth provides.
We're all connected. The shaman knew that."
She fell silent as one of the younger warlocks hurried by, a small capering thing at its heels. As they passed, the little thing turned to look at Draka and smiled, showing a mouth crammed full of pointed teeth. Draka could not suppress a shudder.
Durotan sighed and handed her a scroll. "I just received this. We must all prepare for a long march. We are to leave our lands."
"What?"
"Blackhand's orders. He has relocated to this new citadel that has been made for him and he wants his army there. It is no longer enough for us to join
together to attack. We must all live together and be ready to follow where Blackhand leads us."
Draka stared up at him incredulously, then her eyes dropped to the scroll. She read it quickly, then rcrollcd it and handed it to him.
"We had best prepare," she said quietly, then turned and strode back to their tent. He watched her go, and wondered exactly what it was that made his heart break at the sight.
The Citadel was incomplete, but the moment it came into Durotan's sight, he was stopped dead in his tracks. Beside him there were several awed murmurs.
"So powerful!"
"So big!"
"Worthy of a Warchief!"
Had Durotan spoken, he would have said: Blasphemous, A blight upon the land. Out of harmony with everything we are.
The traveling Frostwolf clan was still many leagues distant, but the Citadel perched upon the horizon like a buzzard. There was nothing in its design that bespoke orcish building. This structure, this architectural nightmare, this offense to eye and spirit was larger even than the draenei buildings. Of course, Durotan knew its purpose, and it would have to be enormous if it were to constantly house an elite force of orcish warriors. Still, he had expected something else.
Instead of the smooth, sleek lines that marked the structures of the draenei, this fortress was sharp and jagged. Instead of coexisting with the landscape, it dominated it. Hewn from black stone and jagged wood and metal, it fairly brisded against the sky. Durotan knew that he could see only the main tower from here, but that was enough. He stood as if rooted to the spot, reluctant to take a single step closer to the monstrosity.
A silent look passed between him and Draka. Were they the only ones left who saw? The rest of the Frostwolves moved forward, passing their chieftain. Reluctantly. Durotan squeezed his mount and continued.
Proximity to the fortress did nothing to make it seem more attractive. Now Durotan could see other buildings-barracks, storage silos, a flat expanse of training areas that were crowded with large weapons he had never seen before. They. too. looked dark, and dangerous, and deadly.
Officious members of the Blackrock clan and others greeted Durotan perfunctorily and sent the Frostwolves to a flat area in the western part of the complex to begin setting up tents. It was heading on toward dusk when Durotan received the summons to report to the courtyard of the Citadel, along with several others from his clan. The group of about twenty walked the distance and waited.
He heard the drums first, in the distance. Durotan tensed. They had specifically been instructed not to bring any weapons, just to come and wait for . . . they were not told what. Draka glanced at him uneasily. He had no assurance to offer her; he was as in the dark about what was to unfold as she.
The drums came closer. The earth began to vibrate beneath Durotan's feet. Such was not unusual when the drumming started in circle, but so far away? He heard other concerned murmurings and knew that he was not the only one with a twinge of
apprehension.
The earth continued to shake, the vibrations growing stronger. Two Blackrock riders approached, looking exultant. "Do not fear, proud members of the Horde!" one of them cried. "Our new allies, brought into our ranks by the mighty Blackhand. are approaching! Welcome them!"
There was something familiar in the feel of the ground shaking. The only other time Durotan had ever experienced such a thing was when he had been fighting-
"Ogres!" someone screamed. And indeed, now Durotan could see them. Dozens of them, huge and purposeful, were striding toward the gathered group of ores. More wolfridcrs from the Blackrock clan were trotting about, shouting and blowing horns in triumph. The crowd was going insane with delight, yelling and dancing and cheering wildly.
These were the new allies? Durotan could scarcely believe it. Even as he stared, unable to find words, the biggest ogre he had ever seen appeared. Blackhand himself strode beside it. his movements as lithe and proud as if the mammoth thing did not make him look like a child's toy.
"We will crush the draenei!" Blackhand bellowed, and as if they had been awaiting the cue, the ogres marching with him cried,
"Crush! Crush! Crush!"
For a sick, dizzying moment, Durotan was a child again, fleeing before such a monster. He blinked, and he again saw in his mind's eye his father's strong frame smashed and broken, blood and life dripping into the ground, Garad's skull crushed like a nut by a single blow from an ogre's club.
Ores were fighting alongside monstrous, feeble-brained creatures in an effort to destroy an intelligent, peaceful race.
The world had gone mad,
Velen shuddered. His assistant was at his elbow, offering a warm, soothing drink, but the Prophet waved it away. No comfort could come from a beverage now. No comfort could ever truly come again.
He had grieved when word had come that Telmor had fallen, and with the city his dear friend Restalaan. It had been even more painful to hear how the attack had occurred. Velen had seen something special in the youth Durotan had been, and his treatment at the ore's hands had only served to confirm his faith in the chieftain of the Frostwolf clan. But now this. Durotan and Orgrim had been the only two ores ever to witness how the green stone had protected the city. One of them had even memorized the
incantation that would deactivate the stone's protective camouflage. A handful had escaped to flee here, to the Temple of Karabor.
Their wounds had been dressed, but there was nothing Velen or anyone else could do to heal their shattered spirits.
But worse news was to come. The refugees did not tell of simple bows and arrows, or axes or spears or hammers being the sole weapons of destruction. They
spoke in low, hushed voices of greenish-black bolts of terrible pain, of torment beyond anything that the shaman had hitherto inflicted upon their enemies. They spoke of creatures gibbering and capering at the feet of those who wielded this magic based on suffering and agony.
They spoke of man'ari.
Suddenly, many things fell into place with a dreadful logic. The abrupt, irrational attacks by the orcs. Their sudden increase in technology and skills. The fact that they had turned their backs on shamanism, a religion that, as Velen understood it, required a give-and-take relationship between the elemental powers and those who would wield them. Those who would command man'ari did not seek balance or harmony with their power; They sought dominance.
Just as Kil'jaeden and Archimonde had.
The ores were nothing more than pawns in the hands of the eredar. Velen knew that he and the rest of the draenei, the "exiles,"
were the real targets. The orcish Horde, augmented now with creatures that were immensely powerful, was the way by which Kil'jaeden sought to destroy him. For a brief moment Velen wondered if perhaps the new leader of this Horde would listen to reason; if he would turn and fight alongside the draenei to overthrow Kil'jaeden once he learned how he had been used. He dismissed the thought almost at once. It was probable that those who were being used by Kil'jaeden knew of the eredar's true nature and purpose, and
the offer of power likely seemed believable as well as seductive. So had Archimonde and Kil'jaeden succumbed, and they were far older, stronger, and wiser than any ore.
And now, this vision, adding insult to injury. A vision of the lumbering ogres allying with the ores-something that he once would have dismissed as a dream brought on by a too-rich meal. Now, he knew it to be the truth. Something had changed the inherent nature of the ores so drastically, so irrevocably, that they had allied with creatures that they had hated for generations against the draenei, a people they had been tentative friends with for almost as long.
If this had happened elsewhere, the response would be simple. Velen would gather his people and flee, protected by the Naaru.
But the ship had crashed, and K'ure lay dying, and there was no escape other than fighting against this Horde and praying that somehow, some way, they would survive.
Ah, K'ure, my old friend. How I miss your wisdom now, and how bitter it is that you be in the hands of the enemy, who does not even understand that you exist.
He held the stone known as Spirit's Song close to his heart, and felt the faintest of flickers from the dying Naaru. Velen closed his eyes and bowed his head.
Gul'dan looked around the room with utter satisfaction. Everything was going as planned. The Shadow Council had been meeting f r s
o ome time now, and thus far, Gul'dan felt confident he had selected them well. They were
J all prepared-nay, eager-to turn their backs on their people in order to advance their own aspirations to power. They had accomplished so much already, acting through their puppet that was foolish enough to believe he was a true part of the Council rather than simply their mouthpiece. It had
been easy to get him elected Warchief, and as long as the Council smiled and nodded at him for the few moments that he attended the meetings, he did not question his position. But Blackhand always departed before the real meetings began, sent off on some mission or other that made his barrel chest swell with pride.
"Greetings," Gul'dan said as he slipped into his chair at the head of the table. As always, Ner'zhul lurked in a corner, never invited to sit with the others, but permitted to hear their conversations, Kil'jaeden had so instructed, and while Gul'dan was unsure as to why his benefactor desired this, he wanted nothing more than to stay in Kil'jaeden's good graces and did not demur.
The Council murmured perfunctory greetings, and Gul'dan got down to business. "How are the various clans reacting to the idea of ogres as allies? Kargath, let's start with you."
The chieftain of the Shattered Hand clan grinned and grunted. "They are primed for bloodshed, and they don't care who helps them slit open draenei throats,"
Rough laughter filled the cavern as many of the Council nodded in agreement. In the dim light provided by the torches, their eyes seemed to Gul'dan to glow orange. A few, however, scowled and did not join in the merriment.
"I have heard protests from some in the Whiteclaw clan." one said. 'And Durotan of the Frostwolves still bears watching, for all that he led the attack on Telmor."
Gul'dan held up a hand. "Do not fear, I have had Durotan in my mind for some time."
"Why has he not been eliminated?" Kargath growled angrily. "It would be easy to replace him with another more in line with our plans. Durotan is becoming well known for disagreeing with Blackhand's position-and yours as well."
"That is precisely why I still need him alive," Gul'dan said, watching to see who understood without further explanation. He saw comprehension register on a few faces, while others still looked puzzled and angry.
"Because he is known for a more moderate stance," Gul'dan continued, regretful that he had to spell it out for anyone on the Council, "when he docs Finally go along, everyone else who might have doubts goes with him. He speaks for many who do not dare speak for themselves. If Durotan agrees, so goes their logic, then it must be all right. As Kargath mentioned, the Frostwolf clan is not the only one who appears to have reservations,"
"But.. . what if there comes a time that he docs not agree? Some line he is not willing to cross?"
Gul'dan smiled frostily. "Then we will deal with him in a way that best advances our power without placing it at risk. As we always do." Gul'dan decided it was time to change the subject. He leaned forward, placing his hands on the table. "Speaking of those who have reservations. I have heard that there are some who continue to attempt to contact the elements and the ancestors."
One of the members looked uncomfortable. "I have attempted to dissuade them, but I cannot see how I can punish them for it. It was, after all, belief that the ancestors wanted us to attack the draenei that even made this possible."
He sounded a bit defiant. Gul'dan smiled reassuringly "Yes indeed. That was the bait that hooked them so deeply." He glanced over at Ner'zhul. The older shaman met his eyes and then glanced down quickly. Such had been the bait that had hooked Ner'zhul as well-bait that did not hold the same appeal for Gul'dan.
"But that is no longer necessary," Gul'dan continued. "We must make sure that there is no turning back to the old ways. We have been lucky indeed in our campaign, and with the ogres success is likely to continue. But if there are any setbacks, any battles that go poorly, then those who still hold shamanism close to their hearts may find an appreciative car. That won't do at
all." He tapped his chin thoughtfully. "We must do more than simply encourage warlock practices. We must actively discourage shamanism. It would be unfortunate if for some reason the ancestors actually were able to communicate with their descendants."
Again, he glanced at Ner'zhul. It had only been when Ner'zhul had traveled to the sacred mountain that he had been able to speak with the ancestors and discover what had really been going on. Until that point, even as powerful a shaman as he was, Ner'zhul had been tricked by illusions. The answer, therefore, seemed simple.
Deep in the disembodied dreaming floated the beings that were made of light. They had the memories of wlutt had gone before, and they had glimpses into the future. Long had they dwelt here, fed by the Other, who was like them, but not like them, and who they sensed was well into the heart of a slow passing. Until recently, they had dwelt in this state of being-not-being in peace and tranquility. But now, defilement and hatred and danger had come. They could not reach the sleeping, beloved living any longer.
And the beloved living did not come as they used to, to replenish the sacred pool and unintentionally keep the Other alive. Only the Greatly Deceived One had come, weeping and begging, but too far lost in the deception to be aided.
Suddenly, their deep dreaming was disrupted. A tremor went through them. Pain savaged them and they cried out for aid from the Other, who could not help them, who could not help itself The dark unholy things that had once been beings of beauty were coming The ancestors seixsed their approach. They came inexorably, joining their powers, creating a ring
of darkness and severance around the base of the mountain. Darkness visible danced from the twisted things who had followed Sargeras, lured by the promise of power, fed now with the promise of the obliteration of everything. The ancestors felt the seething, focused hatred coalesce into a manifestation of greenish-black energy, whipping around like severed tentacles, seeking a dreadful union. Slowly, inexorably, their stranglehold increased until a rope
of shadow power choked the mountain, sealed it shut, preventing any lost orc from entering, any frantic soul from departing.
And now, the Other, too, cried out in grief as the circle was sealed shut. For without the shaman to bring it water, it could not even continue to attempt to heal itself. And without the Other, there would eventually be no ancestors.
Far away, in their sleep, the few ores who still secretly thought of themselves as shaman trembled and wept, their dreams corrupted into nightmares of endless torment and an inescapable doom.
Eighteen
Iam one of the second wave of shaman, just as I am the leader of the second, and I pray better and wiser, incarnation of the Horde. I have spoken with the elements and spirits, and I have felt them working in harmony with me many times, and refusing their aid almost as often.
But I have never seen the spirits of the ancestors, not even in my dreams; my soul yearns for such a connection. Until very recently, those who once walked the path of the shaman did not even dream of being able to walk it again, and yet they do.
Perhaps one day, the barriers between us and the beloved dead, too, will be lifted.
Perhaps.
But I wonder, if they truly knew how far we wandered from their loving teachings, if they saw what we had done in Draenor, done to Draenor.. . perlxaps even now they would turn their backs on us and leave us to our fates. And if they so chose, I cannot say that I would blame them.
"I don't understand." Ghun said. He was the youngest of the clan's warlocks, and still, Durotan mused with bitterness, an idealist.
He had seen Ghun's nose wrinkle at the strange creatures he was forced to utilize in the battle against the draenei. He had seen the youth's face filled with regret as his enemy writhed in agony before him. Drek'Thar had brought the boy to Durotan's attention after the declaration from Gul'dan had been issued. "What is wrong in hoping that the elements will one day work with us again?
And why can I not go to Oshu'gun?"
Durotan had no real answers for him; the decree that no one must ever again
practice the shamanic arts on pain of severe punishment-or exile or death for repeated violations-had seemingly come out of nowhere. True, most of those who had walked the shamanic path had turned from it when die elements abandoned them. But what about the ancestors? Why in the world, in this time of crisis and need, did Gul'dan forbid the ores their most sacred place?
And because he had no answers for a youth who deserved them, Durotan grew angry. His voice was gruff and deep.
"In order to triumph over the draenei, our Warchief has made certain allies. These allies have given us the warlock powers you control. Do not lie to me, I know you are pleased with the results."
Ghun's sharp-nailed, long fingers had been working in the dead earth and had dislodged a stone. He tossed it up and down in his palm. Durotan frowned, looking at the boy's skin. The dryness of this place and the harsh conditions under which they had been laboring for nearly two years now were taking a toll. Normally smooth brown skin, stretched tight over toned muscle, was dry and flaky. Absently Ghun scratched at a patch of rough skin. Durotan glanced at the new skin underneath.
It had a greenish tint.
For a moment, mindless, animal panic washed over Durotan. Durotan forced himself to be calm and look again. There was no mistaking it-the skin was indeed slightly green. He had no idea what it meant, but it was new, and it was strange, and he instinctively did not like it. Ghun seemed not to have noticed. He hurled the rock with a grunt, watching it sail into the distance.
Had Ghun been older, he would have noticed the warning in the tone of voice his clan chieftain used earlier. But he was young and wrapped up in his own concerns, and did not heed the warning.
"The spells . . . the creatures who obey me ... I am pleased with the efficiency. But not with how it is efficient. It feels-it feels wrong, my chieftain. Killing is killing, and the elements used to give me powers that
killed my foe just as dead. But I never felt this way about it when they gave me the power. We are in this war because the ancestors told us we needed to kill the draenei,"
Ghun continued. "So why is Gul'dan now saying we can't go talk to them?"
Something inside Durotan snapped. He let out a furious bellow and hauled the boy to his fret. He gripped the fabric of Ghun's shirt and brought his face to within an inch of the shocked young warlock's.
"It doesn't matter!" he cried. "I will do what is best for the Frostwolves, and now that means doing what Gul'dan and Blackhand tell us to do. Obey this new order!"
Ghun stared up at him. As abruptly as it came the white-hot fury departed, leaving sorrow in its wake. Durotan added in a harsh whisper meant for the boy's cars alone, "I won't be able to protect you if you don't."
Ghun looked up at him, an odd, orange gleam in his eyes for an instant, then he looked down and sighed.
"I understand, my chieftain. I will not bring dishonor upon the Frostwolf clan."
Durotan let him go. Ghun stepped back, straightened his clothes, bowed, and departed. Durotan watched him go, conflicted. Ghun, too, sensed the wrongncss in the way things were unfolding. But a single youth attempting to contact the elements could not stand against it.
Nor, Durotan thought bitterly, could a single chieftain.
A sacred site was the next to fall beneath the might of the Horde.
Hard on the heels of the proclamation banning shamanism was the order to march on a place the draenei called the Temple of Karabor. Although it lay close to the Shadowmoon Valley, the ancestral lands of Ner'zhul's own clan, who had taken the name Shadowmoon from that same valley, no orc had ever
seen it before. It was a sacred place, and as such had been respected by the ores. At least it had been respected until now. when Blackhand stood before his assembled army and ranted against the so-called
"spirituality" of the draenei,
"The cities we have taken so far were mere practice," Blackhand declared. "One day soon, their capital will be destroyed. But before we shatter their most important city, we will shatter them as a people. We will storm this site! Smash their statues. Destroy everything that means anything to them. Slaughter their spiritual leaders. They will lose heart and then ... then claiming their city will be as easy as killing a blind wolf pup."
Durotan. who stood with the other armed and mounted warriors, glanced at Orgrim. As was almost always the case, his old friend stood at Blackhand's side, Orgrim had become a master at keeping his face impassive, but he could not completely hide his feelings from Durotan. He, too, knew what this meant. The temple was Velen's home. The Prophet had only been visiting Telmor that day when Orgrim and Durotan had met him; his place was in the temple, where he prayed and meditated and served as a prophet and guide to his people. They would very well slay him this day, if he was there. It had been hard enough to kill Restalaan. Durotan would have prayed that he would not be forced to kill Velen, too . . . had there been anyone to pray to.
Six hours later, as he stood atop the stairs to the great scat of the temple of the draenei, he almost choked from the smells that assaulted his nostrils. The now-familiar reck of draenei blood. The stench of urine and feces and the thick odor of fear. The sweet, cloying smell of incense. Blood covered the soles of his boots as they crunched on strewn rushes, releasing a clean fragrance that somehow made all the other scents so much worse-
Durotan doubled over and vomited, the taste sour in his mouth. He heaved and choked until his stomach was utterly empty, then with trembling hands rinsed his mouth with water and spat.
Harsh laughter greeted his cars and he flushed. He turned to see Blackhand's two male brats, Rend and Maim, laughing at him.
"That's the spirit," Rend said, chuckling still. "That's all they deserve-our vomit and spit."
"Yeah," said Maim unoriginally. "Our vomit and spit!"
Maim kicked the corpse of a nearby priest clad in pale purple vestments and spat on it. Durotan turned away in disgust and horror, but there was no respite. Everywhere he looked he saw ores doing the same thing to corpses: defiling them, looting them, putting on their bloody, rent robes and parading about mockingly. Others were methodically filling sacks with beautifully carved bowls and plates and candlesticks while they crunched on sweet fruits that had been left as offerings to deities that the ores didn't begin to understand and didn't want to. Blackhand. with another victory to his credit, had found some kind of alcoholic beverage and was chugging it down so quickly some of the green fluid spilled and dripped onto his armor.
Is this what we have become? Murderers of unarmed priests, looters of things holy to them, defilers of their very bodies? Mother Kashur ... in a way I am glad you are forbidden to us ... I would not want you to see this.
"They have taken the temple," said Kil'jaeden, "but they have not found me my prize."
Kil'jaeden's voice was as honey-smooth as ever, but his tail lashed agitatedly. Gul'dan's stomach clenched in fear.
"Velen the Traitor must have known somehow," Gul'dan said. "He is called 'prophet' after all."
Kil'jaeden's massive head whipped around, and Gul'dan had to force himself not to quail. Then Kil'jaeden nodded slowly.
"You are right," he said. "If he were an easy and stupid enemy, I would have found him here now."
Gul'dan began to breathe again. Part of him burned to ask what Velen had
done to one who was, he was certain, his own kind in order to earn himself such single-minded hatred. But Gul'dan was wise enough to
keep silent. He could live with his curiosity unsatisfied on this particular issue.
"With their temple taken for our own purposes. Great One, surely those that remain will all have fled to the city. They will be there, thinking themselves safe, but they will be trapped instead."
Kil'jaeden stccplcd his scarlet fingers and smiled. "Yes," he said. "Yes. The temple shall be yours. Blackhand is quite comfortably ensconced in the Citadel. But before you order your little puppets to attack the draenei stronghold, I have a little . . . gift for them."
Ner'zhul waited until Gul'dan was finished. He watched beneath half-closed lids as Gul'dan wrote letter after letter, getting ink stains on his stubby fingers, using those same stubby fingers to pop a piece of fruit or chunk of meat into his mouth. These were important letters, then; normally Gul'dan would have one of the unctuous scribes send out missives.
The temple had been . . . purged, was the word Gul'dan had used. The priests that lingered to bravely and foolishly stand against the wave of ores had been killed with ruthless speed and efficiency. Ner'zhul heard that their bodies had been violated, and found that part of him still held onto enough compassion that the thought sickened him. Those violated bodies were long gone, as were their sacred items. Much of the temple had been closed off; the Council and its servants did not require that much room. Some furnishings had been taken and used for the Council's needs. Others had been torn down or removed, replaced with the dark, ominously spiky decorations that were rapidly becoming inextricably associated with the Horde. The entire structure had been renamed the Black Temple, and instead of priests and prophets, it now played host to liars and traitors. And, Ner'zhul mused bitterly, he was certainly among that number.
At last, Gul'dan was finished. He dusted the ink with powder to prevent smears and sat back. He looked up at his former master with thinly veiled
disgust.
"Address them and take them to the couriers. see that you do it quickly."
Ner'zhul inclined his head. He still could not bring himself to bow before his erstwhile apprentice and Gul'dan, knowing full well just how broken Ner'zhul was, did not press it. He sat down in the chair Gul'dan vacated, and the moment Gul'dan's heavy stride could no longer be heard, he immediately began to read.
Gul'dan expected him to read the letters, of course. And indeed there was nothing contained in them that Ner'zhul did not know.
He was privy to all meetings of the Shadow Council, though he was forced to sit on the cold stone floor of the Black Temple and not at the huge stone table with those who had the real power. He was not certain just why he was allowed, only that for some reason Kil'jaeden wanted him there. Otherwise, he was certain Gul'dan would have dispatched him here now.
His eyes flew over the words, and he was sickened by them. He felt utterly impotent, like a fly trapped in the sticky sap that flowed down the barks of the olemba trees. Or, that used to. From what he had heard, the trees that provided the sweet nectar had either been cut down, their wood used for weapons, or were dying. Ner'zhul shook off the imagery and began to roll up the missives, his eyes falling on the unused pieces of parchment and stillfilled inkwell and pen.
The thought was so audacious his heart stopped for an instant.
Quickly he looked around. He was completely alone, and there was no reason to expect Gul'dan back. Gul'dan, Kil'jaeden, the Council-they thought him broken, as harmless as an ancient, toothless wolf that warmed its old bones by the fire until at last it slipped into the sleep of death. And they were mostly right.
Mostly.
Ner'zhul had reconciled himself to the fact that he had had his power taken away from him. His power, but not his will. If that too had been taken from him, he would have been unable to resist Kil'jaeden at all. Ner'zhul could not act directly, but he might be able to contact someone who could.
His fingers trembled as he took another piece of parchment. He was forced to pause for a long moment and calm himself before he could write anything legible. Finally, he scribbled a brief message, blotted the ink, and rolled it up. The wolf was toothless. But the wolf had not forgotten what it was like to fight.
More orders to march. Durotan was growing heartily sick of it. Their was no respite any more, just battle, repairing armor, eating increasingly tough and stringy meat, sleeping on the earth, and another battle. Gone were the times of drumming and feasting and laughing and ritual. The perfect triangle of the Mountain of Spirits on the horizon had been replaced by the dark, forbidding image of a spire that occasionally emitted black smoke. Some said a creature slept deep inside the mountain, and that one day, it would awaken. Durotan did not know what to believe anymore.
When the courier rode up, Durotan took the missive and began to read it with dull eyes. Those eyes widened as he read, and by the time he had finished it he was sweating and trembling. He looked up, wondering madly if someone had been able to glean the contents of the letter just by watching him read it. Ores strode past him, dust clinging to their rough, flaky skins and battered armor. No one gave him so much as a disinterested glance.
He hurried to Draka, the one person in the world he dared share this information with. Her eyes widened as she read.
"Who else knows of this?" she said quietly, fighting to keep her face impassive.
"Only you," he said, equally softly.
"Will you tell OrgrimT"
Durotan shook his head. Pain laced his heart. "I dare not. He is oath-bound to tell Blackhand."
"Do you think Blackhand knows about this?"
Durotan shrugged. "I have no idea who knows what. I only know that I must protect my people. And I will do so."
Draka looked at him long and hard. "If we as an entire clan do not do this thing . . . we will attract attention. You risk punishment.
Maybe even exile or death."
Durotan stabbed a finger at the letter. 'Any one of those things is better than what will happen if we obey No. I have sworn to protect my clan. I will not give them over to-"
He realized belatedly that his voice had risen and some heads were starting to turn. "I will not give them over to this."
Draka's eyes filled with quick tears and she gripped his arm hard. Her nails dug into his flesh. "That," she said fiercely, "is why I became your mate. I am so proud of you."
Nineteen
I am proud of my heritage. I am proud that I can name Durotan and Draka as my parents. I amproud that Orgrim Doomhammer called me friend and trusted me with the leadership of the people he loved.
I am proud of iny parents' courage . . . and at the same time, I wish there had been more they could do. But I am not in their place.
It is easy to sit back, secure in my position and comforts in this life, decades after the fact, and say, "You should done this," or
"You should have said that."
I offer no judgment on anyone save a handful of individuals who knew full well what they were doing, knew that they were trading the lives and destiny of their people for gratification in the moment, and did so gleefully.
For the others .. . I can only shake my head and be grateful that I was not forced to make the choices they did.
Gul'dan was so excited he could hardly contain himself. He had looked forward to this moment ever since Kil'jaeden
had first spoken of it. He had wanted to move forward even faster than his master did, but Kil'jaeden had chuckled and counseled patience.
"I have seen them, and they are not quite ready yet. Timing is everything, Gul'dan. The same blow delivered too early or too late docs not kill, only wounds."
Gul'dan thought it an odd metaphor, but understood what Kil'jaeden meant by it. But now, at last, Kil'jaeden thought the ores ready for the final step.
The Black Temple had a central courtyard open to the night sky When the
temple belonged to the draenei, this area had been a lush garden, with a rectangular pool at the center. The conquerors had drunk their fill of the sweet, pure water over the last few weeks with no care about replenishing it, and now the pool was nothing more than an empty space of stone and tiles. The trees and flowering plants that had surrounded it had long since died, withering with astonishing speed. At Kil'jaeden's request, Ner'zhul and Gul'dan now stood beside that empty pool. Neither of them knew what to expect.
For long hours they stood in utter silence. Gul'dan wondered if perhaps he had displeased his lord in some way. The thought made him break out in a cold sweat, and he glanced nervously at Ner'zhul. He wondered if perhaps tonight the defiant shaman was going to be slain for his disobedience, and he perked up a bit at the thought. His mind was wandering, considering various tor-ments that might be imposed upon Ner'zhul, when a sudden loud crack of thunder made them both gasp aloud. Gul'dan looked up at the sky. Where there had hitherto been a host of stars, now there was only a black emptiness. He swallowed hard, his eyes riveted on the darkness.
Suddenly the darkness began to churn. It looked like a thundcrhcad. black and pulsing. Then it began to swirl in a spiral. The spiraling picked up speed. A wind lifted Gul'dan's hair and stirred his robes, gently at first, then more fiercely, until he felt the wind scouring his skin. The earth beneath his feet rumbled. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Ner'zhul's lips move, but he could not hear what if anything was said. The wind was too loud, the trembling of the earth beneath his increasingly unsteady feet too intense.
The sky cracked open.
Something bright and blazing screamed to earth directly in front of Gul'dan and Ner'zhul. It struck the ground so hard that Gul'dan was knocked off his feet. For a long, terrifying minute, he could not breathe; he simply lay on the earth and gasped like a fish until finally his lungs remembered how to function and he inhaled a great surge of air.
He got to his feet, his body shaking uncontrollably, and lost his breath again
at what he beheld.
It towered over him. Chunks of earth flew as it shook four legs that ended in hooves and flapped
large, leathery wings in annoyance. Its hair was more of a mane, flowing in green tendrils over its neck and down its back. Green eyes glittered like fiery stars and its swooping tusks caught the dim light as it opened its mouth. It seemed to have row after row of sharp teeth, and its bellow made Gul'dan want to drop to the earth and weep in utter terror. Somehow, he remained standing and silent before the monstrosity. It raised its clenched fists and shook them fiercely, then lowered its head and looked around at the huddled, quaking ores.
What is that thing? Gul'dan screamed silently.
Suddenly. Kil'jaeden appeared, looking down at Gul'dan and grinning fiercely.
"Behold my lieutenant, Mannoroth. Well has he served me and well shall he continue to serve. On other worlds, they call him the Destructor. But here, he is the savior. Gul'dan," purred Kil'jaeden, and suddenly Gul'dan felt weak and sick again. "You know what I am offering your people."
Gul'dan swallowed hard. He did not dare glance at Ner'zhul, whose gaze he felt boring into his back.
Yes, he knew well what Kil'jaeden was offering. Power beyond imagining . . . and slavery for eternity. Kil'jaeden had offered the former to Ner'zhul in exchange for the latter, and Ner'zhul, the coward, had balked. He had not wanted to doom his people.
Gul'dan was untroubled by such scruples. All he could think of was the reward Kil'jaeden had promised. "I do know. Great One,"
Gul'dan said, surprised by the strength and steadiness of his voice, "I know, and I accept my lord's most generous offer."
Kil'jaeden smiled. "Excellent," he said. "You are wiser than your predecessor."
Confident and elated, Gul'dan turned to gloat at Ner'zhul. The elder shaman stared at his former apprentice imploringly He did not dare to speak, of course, but he did not need to. Even in the dim light of the stars, his expression was plain to read.
Gul'dan's lips curled around his tusks, and he turned back to regard Mannoroth. He was still terribly imposing, but Gul'dan's fear had retreated in the face of his overwhelming desire for power. He gazed at the being, knowing that it, like he himself, was highly regarded by the one they both served. They were brothers in arms.
"Only a special blade can do what I ask of you, Gul'dan," rumbled Kil'jaeden. He extended his hand. The dagger seemed tiny in comparison to the huge palm upon which it rested, but it was quite large when Gul'dan curled his own fingers around it.
"This has been forged in the fires of the mountain in the distance," Kil'jaeden said, pointing to the smoking mountain. "My servants have worked long and hard to craft it. You know what to do, Mannoroth."
The creature nodded its huge head. Its tail moving to balance its bulk, it knelt on its front two feet and extended an arm. It turned its hand upward, exposing the comparatively softer flesh of its wrist.
For a heartbeat, Gul'dan hesitated. What if this was some sort of trick, or a test? What if Kil'jaeden really didn't want him to do this? What if he failed?
What if Ner'zhul was right?
"Gul'dan," said Kil'jaeden, "Mannoroth is known for many things. Patience is not among them."
Mannoroth growled softly and his green eyes glinted. "I am eager to see what will happen. All of your people ... Do it!"
Gul'dan swallowed hard, lifted the blade, aimed its gleaming edge toward the flesh of Mannoroth's exposed wrist, and brought the knife down as hard as he could.
And flew backward from the force of Mannoroth's blow as the creature bellowed in pain. Dazed, he lifted his head and blinked, trying to clear his vision.
Liquid fire spouted from the wound, glowing a sickly greenish yellow as it pumped into the pool of the draenei priests. The injury was tiny compared to the vastness of Mannoroth's body, but the blood flowed steadily as if from a waterfall. Faintly, Gul'dan was aware that Ner'zhul, the weakling, was crying. Gul'dan could not tear his eyes from the sight of the unholy blood pouring, pouring without ceasing, from the creature who continued to roar and thrash in pain. He got to his feet and walked over to the edge of the pool, being very, very careful not to come into contact with the fluid spewing from the wound he himself had made. "Behold the blood of the Destructor," gloated Kil'jaeden. "It burns away all diat will not serve you, Gul'dan. It cleanses all thoughts of hesitation, confusion, or uncertainty. It creates a hunger that can be directed any way you choose. Your little puppet thinks he rules die Horde, but he is wrong. The Shadow Council thinks they rule the Horde, but they are wrong."
Gul'dan lifted his eyes from the pool of glowing green liquid that continued to pump from Mannoroth's injured arm to gaze raptly at Kil'jaeden.
"Gul'dan ... it will soon be you who rules the Horde. They are ready They thirst for what you will give diem."
Gul'dan again turned to look at the flowing liquid.
"Call them to you. Quench that thirst. .. and what their hunger."
The now-familiar horn awakening the Horde and summoning them to the courtyard blew before dawn. Durotan had not been
sleeping; he did not sleep much anymore. He and Draka rose without a word
and began to dress.
Suddenly he heard her inhale swiftly. He turned at once to see that she was staring at him, her eyes wide.
"What is it?" he asked.
"Your . . . your skin," she said quietly He looked down at his bare chest. His skin was dry and flaky and as he scratched at it, the skin beneath it looked . . . green. He remembered seeing the same tint on young Ghun's skin not so long ago.
"It's just the light," he said, trying to reassure them both. She would not be so easily placated. Draka lifted her own arm and scratched. Her skin, too, was green. She lifted dark eyes to him. They both saw it. It was no trick of the light.
"What is happening to us?" Draka asked.
Durotan had no answer. They continued to dress in silence, and as he went outside to the courtyard to wait, Durotan's eyes kept traveling to his arm, the strange green hue of his skin hidden beneath dented metal armor.
The announcement about the assembly had come yesterday afternoon, during a training session with some of the younger ores.
Durotan still could not get used to seeing children who, a few months earlier, had been barely able to walk now wielding swords and axes with extraordinary power. They seemed content with their new status, even pleased, but Durotan fought the urge to shake his head every time he saw them.
Durotan found he could not even summon curiosity about their next target. It would be the same as before-slaughter, rage, defilement of corpses. Recently, even the bodies of slain Horde had been left where they had fallen, their weapons and armor taken to be used on a living body. Sometimes a friend or family member bowed over die corpse for a moment, but even that
was happening less frequently. Gone were the days of bringing home the honored dead and placing them with deep ritual upon a funeral pyre, their spirits sent with all ceremony to join the ancestors. Now, there was no time for rituals, or pyres, or the ancestors. There was no time for the dead. There was no time for anything, it would seem, but slaughtering draenei and mending weapons and armor so the Horde could go out again to continue the task.
He stood with dull eyes in the courtyard, awaiting his orders. Blackhand rode to the gates of the Citadel, where they could see him clearly. There was a wind today With nothing to block it in this desolate place, it caused the banners of the various clans to snap fiercely.
"We have a long march ahead of us," Blackhand cried. "You were told to pack supplies. I hope you listened. Warriors, your weapons must be ready and your armor sound. Healers, have your ointments, potions, and bandages at hand. But before we march to war, we will march to glory."
He lifted a hand and pointed off in the distance, where the sullen mountain that jutted against the sky puffed black smoke.
"That is our first destination. We will stand on the mountain . . . and what happens there will be remembered for a thousand years.
It will begin a time in which the ores will know power that we have never before tasted."
He paused to let this sink in, and nodded, visibly pleased, at the murmur that ran through the crowd.
Durotan tensed. So ... it would be today....
Never one to talk more than he needed to. Blackhand ended this rallying speech with, "Let us go!"
The Horde surged forward eagerly, curious and excited by Blackhand's words. Durotan looked quickly at Draka, who merely nodded her support of
his plan. Then, forcing his heavy feet to move, he followed, caught up in the tide.
There was a narrow, steep path that led partway up the smoky mountain to a large plateau. It looked to Durotan as if a chunk of the mountainside had been cut away with a clean sword strike, so unnaturally perfect was it. His skin crawled at the thought. Very little that came into his life these days was natural, it seemed. Three large slabs of black, polished stone lay in a row, partially embedded in the soil. Theywere beautiful, but sinister at the same time. The ores were wear)* after the long climb in the hot sun wearing full armor and carrying weapons and supplies, and Durotan wondered what the logic behind this was. There seemed little point in exhausting the warriors before the battle. Perhaps the attack would come later, on the morrow when they were rested.
To Durotan's surprise, once everyone had gathered and quieted, it was not Blackhand who addressed them, but Gul'dan.
"It was not so very long ago," Gul'dan said, "that we were a scattered people. We came together only twice a year, and then only to sing and dance and drum and hunt." He said the words in a voice dripping with contempt. Durotan looked down. For centuries, the clans had come together at the Kosh'harg festival. It was not something foolish, as Gul'dan's tone of voice implied, but something sacred and powerful. It was what had kept the clans from attacking one another. But it might have been a lifetime ago, by the way the ores around him reacted. They, too, grunted in disapproval, shook their weapons fiercely, and looked ashamed.
Even those among them who had been the shaman.
"Now, look at us! We stand shoulder to shoulder, clan by clan. Laughing Skull next to Dragonmaw, Thundcrlord next to Warsong, all under the strong, insightful leadership provided by Blackhand-whom you have chosen to unify you. For Blackhand!"
A cheer went up. Durotan and Draka did not participate.
"Under his shrewd guidance, and with the blessings of the beings who have chosen to ally with us, we have grown strong. We have grown proud. We have advanced further in skills and technology in the last two years than we have in two centuries. The threat that once loomed over us has been broken, and it will take only a final push to see it forever crushed. But first.. . first, we will pledge ourselves to this cause and receive blessings in return."
He bent and held up a strange chalice. It looked to be carved from the horn of some creature, but Durotan had never seen even a clefthoof sport so
large a horn. Too, it was curved and yellowed. Strange glyphs had been inscribed on it, and as the night closed in around them, the inscriptions seemed to glow faintly. Whatever the cup contained glowed as well. As Gul'dan held it before him, an eerie yellow-green light lit his face from beneath, casting grotesque shadows.
"This is the Cup of Unity," Gul'dan said in a reverent voice. "This is the Chalice of Rebirth. I offer this to the leader of every clan, and he in turn may offer it to anyone in his clan whom he wishes particularly blessed by the beings who have been so very, very good to us. Who will come forth first, to pledge his loyalty and receive his blessings?"
Gul'dan turned a little to his right, toward Blackhand. The other orc grinned and opened his mouth to speak when a savage, familiar voice rent the night air.
No, Durotan thought. No . .. not him....
Draka's hand clamped down hard on Durotan's arm. "Will you warn him?"
Durotan's throat worked. He could not speak. He shook his head: No. Once, he had counted the slender but imposing orc who strode boldly forward as a friend. But he could not risk revealing that he knew what was going on.
Not even for Grom Hcllscream.
The chieftain of the Warsong clan had made his way through the crowd to
stand in front of Gul'dan. Blackhand looked a bit put out at Hcllscream. Clearly, both Gul'dan and Blackhand had anticipated that the Warchief would drink first.
Gul'dan's mouth quirked in a smile. "Ever one to seize the moment, dear Grom." he said, bowing a little as he handed the cup filled with the swirling green fluid to Grom. Waves of heat and light rose up from the chalice, and Grom's face-already decorated to inspire fear in his enemies and respect from his allies-looked even more alarming.
Grom did not hesitate. He brought the cup to his lips and drank deeply. Durotan watched, straining to see the reaction. Perhaps, after all. the letter had not been sent by someone who wished him good; perhaps it had been a trap-
Gul'dan barely had time to take the chalice from Grom before the other orc stiffened and shuddered. He doubled over for a moment, and the crowd murmured in worry. Durotan stared, horrified, as Grom's hunched-over body pulsated and quivered.
Before his eyes, Grom's shoulders, slender for an ore's, broadened. His armor creaked as it settled over this newly powerful body.
Slowly, Grom straightened. Tall as ever he had been, reshaped by the green liquid to be stronger and thickly muscled, he looked out over the crowd.
What Durotan could see of his face was smooth and healthy and, save for the tattooed jaw . . . completely green.
Grom threw his head back and shrieked again. The
cry was louder than Durotan had ever heard it. It was almost like a knife made of sound that ripped through one's body and left one shattered and bleeding. Durotan covered his cars, as did nearly everyone else, but he could not tear his gaze from Grom's face.
Grom's eyes now glowed red.
"How do you feel, Grom Hcllscrcam, of the Warsong clan?" asked Gul'dan with a peculiar mildness.
Grom's expression of ecstasy was so keen it was almost pain, and he seemed to grope for words. "I feci... magnificent! I feel..." He broke off and screamed a third time, as if only the primal cry would do. "Give me draenei flesh to tear and rip! Draenei blood on my face... I will drink it down until I can hold no more! Give me their blood!"
His chest heaved with the passion of his emotions, his fists clenching and unclenching. He looked prepared to attack an entire city with nothing but his bare hands ... and Durotan thought he would win that battle. Hcllscrcam motioned to his clan.
"Voices of the Warsong! Come forth! Not a one of you will be denied this ecstasy!"
The Warsong warriors rushed forward, all eager to feel what their chieftain was feeling. The cup was passed around, and one by one. they drank. Each one shuddered for a moment in deep pain; each one passed through that pain to apparent delight and obviously increased strength. And the eyes of every one who drank turned a blazing red. Blackhand watched, his frown
increasing. When the last of the Warsongs had drunk from the cup, he grunted. "I will drink!" he demanded, seizing the cup and swigging down a great gulp. Blackhand clutched his throat for a moment, but stayed completely silent while whatever dark magic was in the cup did its hellish duty. He had removed his armor, and the muscles rippling and growing beneath his taut green skin were clearly visible. Red eyes glowed when he finally looked up. He motioned to his sons, and Maim and Rend shoved other ores perfunctorily out of their way as they rushed forward. Durotan saw Griselda, Blackhand's only daughter, hesitate before she, too, stepped up to drink. Blackhand sneered at her.
"Not you," he snarled. Grisclda drew back as if struck. Durotan, who had always been fond of the girl, breathed a sigh of relief.
Blackhand intended to shame her. Instead, he was unwittingly giving her a great gift. Blackhand motioned to Orgrim.
"Come, friend Orgrim! Drink with me!"
Even now, even as his best and oldest friend was being summoned to drink the dark liquid, Durotan could not speak. But thankfully, he did not need to. Orgrim bowed his head.
"My chieftain. I will not take that glory from you. I am your second, not chieftain, and I do not seek that position."
Durotan sagged with relief. Orgrim saw what Durotan had seen, even though he was not privy to the
information Durotan had been given. He was not a fool. He owned his own soul, and he would not surrender it for the sort of power that racked the body and made the eyes burn with such a sinister gleam.
Now the other clan chieftains lined up, anxious for this blessing that had so excited two of their most famous and respected chieftains. Durotan did not move. Drek'Thar leaned in and whispered, "My chieftain-do you not wish the blessing?"
Durotan shook his head. "No. Nor will I permit any of my clan to drink."
Drek'Thar blinked, shocked. "But. . . Durotan, it is obvious that this drink grants great power and passion! You would be a fool not to drink it!"
Durotan shook his head, recalling the contents of the letter. He had been skeptical at first; now he was certain. "I would be a fool if I did," he said quicdy, and when Drek'Thar tried to protest, he silenced the former shaman with a look.
Unbidden and unexpected, words from the draenei prophet Velen floated back to Durotan: We chose not to sell our people into slavery, and for that we were exiled. Durotan knew in his bones that once the ores had drunk from
this chalice, their will was no longer theirs. Gul'dan was doing exactly what the leaders on die draenei's home world had done. He had sold his people into slavery. History was repeating itself; now it was Durotan who defied his leaders for the sake of his people. Perhaps he and his clan, like the draenei, would soon be "exiled ones." It did not matter. What he was doing was right. He realized that now all the chieftains save he had drunk, and the moment he had dreaded was upon him.
Gul'dan waved him forward. "The mighty Durotan! The hero of Telmor!" Durotan forced his face to remain still. "Come and join with the other chieftains. Drink your fill from the chalice!"
"Nay, Gul'dan, I will not do so."
In the light of the torches. Durotan could see that a muscle twitched near Gul'dan's right eye,
"You refuse? Do you think you are better than the others? Do you think you do not need the blessing?"
The other chieftains were frowning now. their breathing labored as if they had been running, their brows glistening with sweat.
Durotan did not rise to the bait. "It is my choice."
"Perhaps others in your clan feel differently," Gul'dan said, sweeping his arms to include the Frostwolf clan in his expansivencss.
"Will you let them drink, then?"
"No. I am die chieftain of die Frostwolf clan. And this is what I choose."
Gul'dan stepped down from the obsidian slab and strode to Durotan. He leaned in and whispered in the chieftain's car. "What do you know and how did you know it?"
It was no doubt meant to be an intimidating gesture, but instead Durotan was
filled with new hope. Gul'dan
felt threatened. But instead of sending an assassin in the night to dispatch someone he regarded as an inconvenience, he was trying to bully Durotan into submission. He had just confirmed the truth of the contents of the mysterious letter, and revealed that he had no idea who its author was. Durotan realized he could survive this and still protect his clan.
He said, equally quietly, "I know enough. And you will never discover how I learned it."
Gul'dan pulled back and forced a smile. "It is indeed your choice, Durotan, son of Garad. And if you choose to deny yourself such a blessing, then you must bear the consequences."
The words were double-edged, but Durotan didn't care. Another day, he might need to worry about what Gul'dan had planned for him.
But not tonight.
Gul'dan returned to his position and cried out to the crowd. "All who wish the blessing of the mighty Kil'jaeden, our benefactor, have received it. Think of this place as hallowed ground, for here the ores took steps to become something far greater dian what we were born as. Think of this mighty mountain as Kil'jaeden's throne, where he sits and watches and blesses us as we do work that will purge us still further of anything other than the best of which we are capable."
He stepped back and nodded to Blackhand. His eyes glowing red, his armor catching the flickering of the torches, Blackhand lifted his arms and cried, "Tonight We make history. Tonight We attack the last remaining stronghold of our enemy. We will tear limbs from bodies. We will bathe in blood. We will storm through the streets of their capital like their worst nightmare. Blood and thunder! Victory to the Horde!"
Durotan stared. Tonight? There had been no strategy discussed. This was not some little hamlet or village Blackhand was talking about, but the draenei
capital. This was their place of last refuge, and he was certain they would fight more fiercely than they had ever before, like cornered animals. He recalled the huge engines of war that had been built, and knew that Blackhand had ordered them moved-where, neither Durotan nor the others knew.
Madness. This was madness.
And as he looked at the screaming bodies surrounding him, their eyes all twin pinpricks of crimson light, he realized that the word was truer than he thought.
Those who had drunk from the tainted cup had indeed gone mad. Grom Hcllscrcam danced closer to the fire, waving his newly muscular arms and throwing his head back, the firelight dancing on once-brown skin that had now turned green. Durotan, sick and dazed with horror, looked into glowing red eyes that were so akin to those of the enslaved creatures the warlocks commanded; that green skin, the same green hue that was already tainting the skins of the warlocks, like Ghun, was even starting to taint Durotan's own skin and that of the one he loved with all his heart.
He thought of the contents of the letter, written in an archaic tongue that few but the highly educated- the shaman and the clan leaders-would know:
You will be asked to drink. Refuse. It is the blood of twisted souls, and it will twist yours and those of all who imbibe. It will enslave you forever. By the love of all we once held dear, refuse.
The ancient language had a single word for "twisted souls.
These were the things that were held in check by the warlock's will, but just barely. The fluid that had passed the lips of those Durotan had called both friend and foe had been the blood of one such. And Durotan watched as the twisted souls that the ores now were somehow bound to danced insanely in the torchlight before racing down the mountains to run, fueled with unnatural rage and energy, to attack the most fortified city this world had ever seen.
Twisted souls.
Dae'mons. Demons.
Twenty
I have spoken to many who were there at the destruction of the city of Shattrath. When I ask them about the event, their minds are clouded and their recall is poor. Even Drek'Thar, who remembers so much with astonishing clarity, stammers and hesitates when asked to recall the details. It is as though with demonic blood fresh in their mouths, those who drank can remember only the fury they felt and not what they did in its grasp. And even those who did not drink, that small handful of which Drek'Thar is a member - even they cannot summon the details to mind. It is as if such an atrocity was so horrific that it wants to be forgotten.
That some draenei survived the assault is not in doubt; I have seen the sad, pathetic things that were once the glorious draenei with my own eyes, wandering forlornly here in Azeroth, soft and shattered, crying for home. These "lost ones" are to be pitied.
So it is that this account is vague, and I regret it. Such a
moment, dark though it may be, should not be forgotten or glossed over. But such is the chronicler's challenge.
The ores charged down the trail, burning with a feral need to destroy. Some were so overflowing with rage and hatred that they took swipes at the very rocks as they passed them. Sonic bellowed their fury. Others were grimly, deathly silent, all their energies contained and simmering, ready to be released at the proper moment.
During that long run, Durotan was more afraid of his own people-of individuals that he had once called friend-than of any ogre wielding a club or any herd of talbuks ... or any enraged, attacking draenei. He was cold with sweat, shaking in his boots, but not from any fear for himself. His fear was for what would happen next-not to the draenei, for their destiny was surely already written, but to the ores. He could not bring himself in those moments
as they were running to Shattrath to call them the Horde. At one point, a horrible rumbling knocked them all off their feet. As they clambered upright, they turned and looked back to where they had come.
It looked as if the mountain had exploded. Liquid fire was belched into the night sky, hurtling upward, then falling and splattering down the jagged peakIt radiated and glowed like the demon blood that the ores had just drunk, though its hue was orange-yellow and not an eerie green. More and more molten stone was spewed from the mountain. It was a glorious, mesmerizing, and horrific sight.
The ores took it as a sign, and a cheer erupted from their ranks. After a few moments of celebrating at the very mountain, the Throne of Kil'jaeden, blessing their endeavor, they turned and continued their race toward slaughter.
A mile outside the city, they slowed. An area had been cleared, and recently too, and for a moment the first ores to arrive at this site simply stared in confusion. This was where they had been told to assemble; this was where their war engines were supposed to have been quartered.
Then, with no warning, something materialized right in front of their eyes. The ores drew back, hissing. Then in the face of all sanity and logic, they started snarling at the huge being. It towered over them, three times taller than the tallest ogre, red from its cloven hooves to the tip of its lashing tail, from its jutting horns to its sharp black nails. Its size was like nothing they had ever seen, but its shape . . . Durotan stared at it, thinking that it looked like nothing so much as a gigantic, crimson-skinned draenei.
The sudden realization that the ores had been plunged into a personal conflict that should never have concerned them crashed over him like a tidal wave.
"You have nothing to fear and everything to celebrate, you who have sworn your allegiance to me!" it cried, its voice penetrating to the very bone, "I am Kil'jaeden, the Beautiful One, the one who has been with you since the beginning. And I am with you now as you head to the most glorious battle
yet. Once, the wicked draenei plotted against you, hiding an entire city from your eyes. But you have destroyed that city, and others, and vanquished their temple. All that remains is this one final battle, and then the threat will be eliminated.
"The green stone that once hid the city of Telmor from you now hides their doom from them. Kehla men samir, solaylamaa kahl!"
And the illusion was dispelled. Before them were dozens of catapults, battering rams, siege weapons of all varieties. Standing beside the engines of war were the ogres, still and silent, their stupid faces filled with determination. They bore weapons suited to their size, and Durotan realized that there were at least three dozen of them ready to fight. They made the huge weapons look like toys.
"There is more, , , ," Kil'jaeden said, and waved his hands. The warlocks all cried out and grasped their heads for a moment, then blinked and grinned. "New spells have flooded your minds. Use them well. Take the draenei now!"
As if he had opened a gate, the bloodthirsty ores leaped into motion. Some of them made for the weapons by which a walled city would fall, pushing them forward with a strength which Durotan had never before seen them display. The ogres immediately went to the others, moving the enormously heavy weapons at a brisk pace. Other ores were too far sunk in bloodlust, and simply raced forward in the direction of the city. What they would do when they got there Durotan did not know, but he and his clan followed dutifully.
The war machines propelled by the ogres and the ores rumbled steadily on. But even before they were maneuvered into position, the walls that protected the city were under attack. Enormous, green-glowing rocks fell from the sky to slam into the city. Towers and citadels that had risen above the wall level cracked and shattered, and the wall itself was starting to crumble in several places.
But it was not just boulders falling from the sky that comprised the attack-it was what rose from them once they had landed.
Moving deliberately but with sickening speed, creatures that appeared made of the same glowing green stone got to their feet and charged. They hammered at the wall, joined now by more mundane stones hurled by the catapults and huge tree trunks rammed into the great gate door. Two ogres were pounding on the door with their clubs, and the timber shuddered. From within, Durotan could hear cries of fury and horror as the draenei tried to battle the creatures-"infcrnals," as he heard one warlock refer to them.
Most of the warlocks were using these new servants, but a few still had the smaller, more familiar creatures obeying their commands.
The city could not last long under such an assault. With a mighty crash, an entire section of stone wall
crumbled. The tide of crazed ores and bellowing ogres swarmed through the breech thus created, shrieking and swinging weapons.
Durotan remained where he was, rooted to the earth, watching as the ores fought and killed and died.
The rage and fury he had seen them display before in the thick of battle was nothing compared to what he saw now. There was no strategy, no attempt at defense, no calls for retreat when retreat was necessary. This was nothing more than murder and slaughter, dealing death and receiving it, stupidly rushing into dead ends where traps had been laid. Such was to be expected from the ogres, and as they fell heavily, blood streaming from their bodies, Durotan did not mourn them. But the ores . . . they were beyond caring about anything but the sensation of their own blood singing in their veins and the battle cries pouring from their throats.
Dozens . . . no, no, hundreds would die this night. The casualties would render the city unlivablc. Come sunrise, blue and green bodies would litter the streets. But for now, it was carnage and chaos and the very depths of insanity. Durotan swung his axe because it was fight or die, and even now, even though he knew his people were on a dark road, he did not wish death.
Kil'jaeden and Mannoroth stood together, watching the green meteors that
housed infcrnals crashing to the earth. "They swarm like insects," grunted Mannoroth. Kil'jaeden nodded, pleased. "Indeed. It is beautiful to watch, I am well pleased."
"What next?"
Kil'jaeden turned eyes of mild surprise on his lieutenant. "Next? There is no next, at least not here. The ores have fulfilled my purpose. They burn with your blood, my friend. It will consume them eventually unless they have an oudct for it. and that outlet is only to be found in slaughtering every last draenei on the face of this world."
He watched as fire joined the glowing green hue in the distance.
"It is well that you are done here," Mannoroth said. "Archimonde mutters that you are wasting time, and our master wishes us elsewhere."
Kil'jaeden sighed. "You speak the truth. Sargeras hungers, and he has been very patient with mc. I do regret one thing-that I won't be watching as they gut Velen. Ah well. Enough to know that it happened. Let us leave this place."
He gestured, and both he and his lieutenant disappeared.
"What do you mean, he was not there?" Gul'dan shrieked. This could not be.
"What I said," Blackhand growled. "We scoured the city. Velen was nowhere to be found."
"Perhaps an ovcrcagcr grunt found him first and mutilated the body," Gul'dan said nervously. This was
not good news. He had instructed Blackhand to find the corpse of the prophet Velen and bring the draenei's head to Gul'dan. It was to be a present to Kil'jaeden.
"Possible. Even likely," Blackhand said. "But from what you told mc, even if
his body had been hacked to pieces, he could not have been mistaken for an ordinary draenei."
Gul'dan shook his head, feeling worried and slightly sick. The draenei had blue skin and black hair. Velen, their prophet, had pale white skin and white hair. As long as a piece of his skin remained whole, he could be identified.
"You scoured the city?"
Blackhand's brows drew together. "I told you we did," he said darkly. His breath started to quicken and his eyes turned even redder as anger rose in him.
Gul'dan nodded. Besotted though the ores were by bloodlust, they would not have failed to search for the body most coveted by their leader. The reward would be too great, the anger if it were overlooked and discovered ialcrtoo lurious.
Somehow, Velen had escaped. That meant that there were probably other draenei out there. In a sudden panic that made his heart race, he wondered just how many he had let slip through his fingers . . . and where in this wide, wide world they had gone.
Once Velen had had an entire temple, filled with acolytes and priests and servants, in which to meditate and pray. Now, he was in a small room, one of only a handful who even had their own room. He held the violet crystal in his hand and tears poured silent and unheeded down his face.
He watched the fall of the city. He had wanted to stay, to lend his own not inconsiderable magic to the fray, but that path would have meant death-not merely his own, but that of his people. They did not need a marshal now. The orcs,their systems
permeated with demonic blood, burned with a lust for killing that would not be sated even if they slew every last draenei in Dracnor, would never be sated until death stiffened their corpses. Kil'jaeden's and Sargeras's Burning Legion of demonic forces owned them now. The ores had numbers, ogres, warlocks,
and a furythat would take them physically and emotionally to places where no rational mind would dare travel. There was nothing Velen could do but let the city fall, for there was nothing he could do that could possibly save it.
Nor could the ores be saved. The only flicker of hope for the eventual redemption of the Horde lay in the single clan who had not drunk the blood, had not made the pact, whose minds and hearts were still their own. Some eighty orcs,and that was all. Eighty, to stand against over a dozen other clans, most much larger than the)', whose Warchief was the worst of them all. The ores would be treated as maddened beasts now, whenever any draenei chanced upon them; things to be put down quickly and mercifully, with the
understanding that while the ores did not fully know what they did, they must die regardless.
Velen had wanted to abandon the city, to have it standing empty when the ores descended. Wanted to save as many draenei lives as he could. But Larohir, the quick-speaking, intelligent general who had succeeded Restalaan after the lattcr's murder, had convinced him it would not work.
"If there is an insufficient number of draenei to slaughter," Larohir had said, his voice soft and compassionate but yet hard as steel,
"then the lust that consumes them will not even be sated temporarily. They will still hunger and catch our scent while it is new, and track us down. Those who flee will die. They must believe that they have slain most of us. And in order for them to believe that... it must be true."
Velen had stared in horror. "You would have me send my people to knowingly be slaughtered?"
"All but a handful of us know what we fled on Argus," said Larohir. "We remember it. We remember what Kil'jaeden did, what happened to our people. We would-we will-happily die to preserve even a handful of our race uncorruptcd."
Velen had looked down then, his heart aching. "If the ores believe they have
slain us, except for a trivial handful, then Kil'jaeden will be satisfied. He will depart."
"The ores will suffer greatly," said Larohir, and did not look displeased. After what the ores had done to the draenei recently, Velen could not blame him. "They will. And I have no doubt that they will continue to track us down."
"But the methods they use to track a few dozen will be different than if they suspect there are a few hundred of us remaining," said Larohir. "It is to our advantage to appear as scattered and helpless as possible."
Velen had looked up at Larohir. haunted. "It is easy for you to speak so. But the decision is not yours. It is mine. I must be the one to say, 'You-you and your family will come with me and live. But you, and you, and you-you will stay behind and let demon-crazed ores tear you to pieces and anoint themselves with your blood.*"
Larohir said nothing. There was nothing to say.
Velen had spoken with each of his people he had chosen to send to die. He had embraced them and blessed them; he had taken items that meant something to them and promised to see that these things survived. He had watched as, stoic and dry-eyed, these walking dead had repaired their armor and sharpened their swords, as if the outcome was actually in question. And he had watched as they marched off, singing the ancient songs, to enclose themselves behind a walled city and wait for mace or axe or spear to end their lives.
Velen could not go with them. He had unique abilities, and if the draenei were to survive, he needed to as well. But he had used the crystal to watch every moment of the battle, and the pain he felt was scaring and
yet purifying. Not one of these people would have died in vain.
The ores did not know about the Zangarmarsh. They had not yet sniffed out this hiding place, and if Velen had anything to say about it, they never would. Here, the best draenei minds would continue to devise ways to harness
energies and direct them, to keep safe the handful who had survived. Here, they would regroup and recover, heal and wait and pray they had at last tricked Kil'jaeden the Deceiver and escaped his terrible gaze.
The ores had captured three of the stones, but Velen still had four: Fortune's Smile, Eye of the Storm, Shield of the Naaru, and, of course. Spirit's Song, And although his link with the Naaru was tenuous, K'ure yet lived.
Even as tears spilled down his white face to drop on the surface of the violet crystal, even as he grieved the
utterly tragic loss of so many lives, Velen, prophet of the draenei, felt hope stirring inside him.
Twenty one
We had lost everything by this point. We had abandoned balanceand harmony in our world, and thus the elements had abandoned us. Demons guarded the entrance to Oshu'gun, cutting us off from the ancestors. Our physical bodies and our very souls had become corrupted from the blood that, in their eagerness for power and strength, most of the ores had gladly imbibed. And then, then- when we had done all this to ourselves under the "guidance"of GuYdan. Kit'jaedenabandoned us. Thuscame what has been called the Dying Time. May its like never visit us again.
"What do I do?" Gul'dan could not believe the words were coming from his own lips, but he was so terrified that advice, any advice, seemed better than this sick fear he lived with.
Ner'zhul regarded him with contempt. "You made this choice."
"It's not as if you are blameless yourself!" Gul'dan snapped,
"Of course not. I made choices for myself, for my own advancement. But I never threw away the future of my people-my world-for it. Where is the power you were promised now. Gul'dan? The power that you bartered our people for?"
Gul'dan turned away, trembling. There was no power, and Ner'zhul knew it. which was why his words bit so deeply.
Far from rewarding his loyal servant with glories and godhood, Kil'jaeden had simply vanished. All that was left of his presence in this world were the warlocks and their demons, a maddened Horde, and a ravaged land.
No, he thought. No, that was not all that was left.
There was still the Shadow Council. There was still Blackhand. the ideal puppet precisely because he did not realize he was one such. And while the
Horde was now infused with the blood of demons, and craved violence and destruction more than meat and drink, they had not gotten out of control. At least, not yet.
He would summon the Council to meet in their beautiful Black Temple. Doubtless the)', too, would be searching for ways to salvage what power was left.
Yes. There was still the Shadow Council.
"The land is dead," Durotan said quietly as he stood with his old friend surveying what had once been vcrdant meadows and foothills, Durotan scuffed at the dirt with his boot. Powdery sand and rock were revealed as he kicked away the dead yellow grass.
Wind, no longer blocked by trees, whistled past them.
Orgrim said nothing for a long time. His eyes told him Durotan was right. He looked to the riverbed where he and Durotan had swum in one of their many challenges, and saw no hint that water had ever flowed in it. What water remained in the land was filthy, clogged with animal corpses and sediment. To drink it was to risk illness; not to drink was to die.
No water, no grasses. Here and there were places that still managed to survive, such as the Terokkar forest, ancestors knew how.
The ores were growing thin, for no grasses meant no herd animals. The last three years had seen more orcish deaths from starvation and disease than from the battles against the draenei,
"More than the land is dead." Orgrim said at last. His voice was thick and heavy. He turned to face Durotan. "How is the Frostwolf's grain supply?"
To his eyes, he and Durotan looked green. Next to others, such as Grom and Blackhand, they still were more brown than green, but the damage was being done, Durotan had theorized that it was the warlock powers that were doing this to them and their world. Certainly those who had directly drunk whatever
potion Gul'dan had concocted for them were a more vivid hue than others.
Strange, Orgrim thought. There was irony in that while the land turned brown when it
should be green, the ores turned green when they should be brown,
Durotan grimaced. "Several barrels were stolen in the attacks."
"Which clan?"
"Shattered Hand."
Orgrim nodded. The Frostwolf clan was bearing the brunt of the recent flurry of attacks. After the Horde had taken Shattrath.
sightings of the draenei had dwindled. It had been a full six months since anyone had reported even glimpsing one of the elusive blue-skinned beings. let alone killing one, Durotan had made the Frostwolf clan a clear target when he refused to drink from the chalice the night Shattrath fell. And even before then, his reluctance to attack the draenei had not gone unnoticed. Now that the draenei-the only focus the ores had as an outlet for their vastly increased bloodlust-were becoming scarce, many felt that somehow Durotan was responsible. Never mind that it was quite likely that the draenei had simply been hunted to extinction-that the initial goal of wiping them off the face of the earth had been achieved.
"I will bring some the next time I see you," Orgrim said.
"I will not take charity."
"If my clan were in your position, you would beat me nearly senseless and shove the food down my throat rather than let me refuse it," Orgrim said. Durotan laughed and seemed surprised that he did so. Orgrim let himself grin. For a moment, if he could ignore the dead land around them, the unnatural hue of their skins, it was as if the horrors of the intervening years had not happened.
Then Durotan's laughter faded, and die present returned. "For the sake of the children. I will accept it." He turned his head, again looking out over the wasteland. New names were cropping up-harsher names, darker names. The Citadel was becoming known as the Hcllfirc Citadel, the entire area the Hcllfirc Peninsula.
"The destruction of the draenei will lead to that of the ores as well if something is not done," Durotan said. "We are turning against each other. Stooping to stealing food from the mouths of children because the land is so wounded it can no longer nourish us. The demons capering at die heels of the warlocks can destroy and torment, but they cannot heal or feed the starving."
Orgrim asked in a low voice. "Has anyone . . . tried to work with the elements?" Such activities were still forbidden, but Orgrim knew that desperation was causing some to rethink the old ways,
Durotan nodded. "It was a failure. We have been met with stony silence. Demons guard Oshu'gun. We can find no hope there."
"Then . , . We are finished," Orgrim said quietly. He glanced down at his hammer, its shaft leaning against his leg as they stood.
He wondered if the prophecy of the Doomhammer was being fulfilled even now; if he
was trie last of his line. Had he already brought salvation and then doom by using this weapon to drive the draenei to extinction?
And how could it possibly be used now to bring justice?
When all was dying . . . how could everything change again?
The will to survive was powerful, Gul'dan thought as he readied himself for sleep. He had taken to sleeping in the Black Temple, in a room he had had redesigned specifically for him. In it. he placed in a ritualized fashion all the trinkets and tools he needed to properly command the demons he summoned: shards from draenei souls, certain stones for the larger creatures, potions to
help him keep his energy up when it flagged. There were skulls, too, and bones, and other signs of dominance. Certain herbs were burned in containers, their pungent or sweet aroma inducing visions.
It was to ajar of such that he turned now. He had lit a small fire in a cauldron and permitted the wood to burn down to glowing embers. Chanting softly, Gul'dan tossed the dried leaves on the fire and forced himself not to cough as the scent filled the air. He went to his bed-he liked to think that perhaps this was the same bed upon which the loathed Velen slept when he was in the temple-and quickly fell asleep.
Gul'dan dreamed, as he had not done since Kil'jaeden's departure. And even while in the strange, dark place that was the vision, he knew it to be true. The vision was that of a vaguely orc-shaped being, dad in a long cloak that obscured his face. He was slender, even more slender than an orc female, but somehow Gul'dan immediately sensed that it was male. Delicately built as he seemed to Gul'dan's eyes, the sense of power that radiated from the stranger all but buffeted Gul'dan. A shiver shook him. When the stranger spoke in his mind, the voice was masculine, oddly pleasant, and profoundly compelling.
"You are feeling adrift and alone," said the stranger.
Gul'dan nodded, cautious and eager at the same time.
"Kil'jaeden promised you power . . . strength . . . godhood. Things that your world has never even seen," continued the smooth voice from a mouth that remained hidden in the shadow of the cloak's hood. The words caressed Gul'dan. lulled him, and frightened him at the same time. But he felt more angry than frightened as he spoke.
"He abandoned me," Gul'dan said. "He caused us to ruin our world, and then left us to die with it. If you come from him. then-"
"Nay. nay," soothed the stranger in that oddly compelling voice. "I come from one even greater," His eyes glittered, deep within the shadow of the hooded cloak. "I come from ... his master."
Gul'dan's skin prickled. "His .. . master?"
And he fell back as his mind was assaulted with images: images of Kil'jaeden and Velen and Archimonde,
as they were long ago. He saw the transformation of the beings known as eredar into monsters and demigods, and he sensed, though never saw. a great presence behind it all.
"Sargeras!"
He still could not see the stranger's face, but Gul'dan knew that he smiled.
"Yes. The one who rules over all. The one we serve. You will soon understand, Gul'dan, that destruction and oblivion are beautiful and pure. That it is the direction in which all things must go. You can resist it and be destroyed, or aid it and be rewarded."
Gautiously, still worried about this cloaked figure and his honeyed words, Gul'dan asked, "What is being asked of me?"
"Your people are dying," the figure said bluntly. "There is nothing left in this world for them to destroy. There is nothing left for them to survive on. They must go elsewhere. Where there is ample food and drink, and worthy prey to slaughter. The ores hunger now for so, so much more than food. Give them the blood they crave."
Gul'dan narrowed his eyes. "That sounds like a reward, not a task to which I am set," he said.
"It is both . . . but that is not the only reward my master offers. You rule the Shadow Council, and you have tasted power. You are the greatest warlock that exists among your people, and you know how that fills you. Imagine if you were ... a god." Gul'dan trembled. Such had been promised before, but somehow, he knew that this Sargeras was much better able to fulfill such
extravagant vows. He thought ol extending a hand and making the earth
tremble, of clenching it hard and stopping a heart. He thought of the eyes of thousands trained upon him, their voices raw from shouting his name. He thought of tastes and sensations he could not yet even imagine, and his mouth watered.
"We have a mutual foe," the stranger continued. "I would see them dead. You would see your people sated with slaughter and killing." And now Gul'dan could make out just the barest hint of features, of pale skin and a thin-lipped mouth framed by black hair that curved in a smile. "It is a partnership that would benefit us both."
"Indeed," Gul'dan breathed. He realized that he was moving toward the stranger as if drawn, then stopped and added, "but I cannot believe that this is all you would ask of mc."
The stranger sighed. "Sargeras will give you all this and more. Only ... he lies imprisoned. He needs assistance to escape. His body is trapped in an ancient tomb, lost beneath a roiling ocean of darkness. He hungers for his freedom, the power that once was his to express, as your ores hunger for bloodshed, as you hunger for power. Bring your ores into this verdant, unspoiled new world. Give them soft flesh into which their axes can bite. Defeat the denizens of this place, strengthen your
people, and with this vast green tide of warriors join me in liberating our master. His gratitude-"
Again the sly smile, the glint of white teeth in the beard. And again that powerful buffet of power, mitigated only by the stranger's will.
"'. . . Well. It is likely beyond even your imaginings, Gul'dan."
Gul'dan considered. As he thought, the image of the stranger shifted and faded. Gul'dan gasped as he stood in a beautiful meadow, the wind tousling his braided hair. Beasts he had never seen before grazed their fill. Along the horizon, healthy tiecs towered.
Strange beings, similar to ores but with pinkish skin, as slender as the
stranger, tended fields and livestock.
Perfect.
The image shifted again. Suddenly he was underwater, swimming down, his lungs not burning for air despite the depth. Kelp swayed in the current, obscuring but not entirely hiding tumbled columns and a slab that bore strange writing, eroded somewhat by time and the ceaseless, gentle caress of water. A shudder passed through him as he realized that this was where Sargeras lay.
Release him from this prison, and then ... and then...
It seemed like a good partnership. Anything would be better than staying here in this world, which would mean a slow death. A beautiful, ripe land, ready for plunder, would all by itself make this bargain worthwhile. And there was so, so much more to come.
He gazed at the stranger raptly. "Tell me what to do."
Gul'dan awoke sprawled on the floor. Beside him on the cold stone was a parchment covered with instructions, written in his own hand. He scanned it quickly: Portal. Azeroth. Humans.
Medivh.
Gul'dan began to smile.
Twenty two
Can a thing be at once a blessing and a curse? A salvation and a doom? For such I hold what happened next in the history of my people. From every account, the demonic energies, used so freely and with no heed given as to their cost, leeched all that was wholesome and life-giving from the world of Draenor. Kil'jaeden had wanted to increase the number of orcs,so that we would become a formidable army, and he had done so, forcing the growth of our younglings and robbing them of their childhood. Now, the orc population was larger than it had ever been, and there was no way to feed the hungry. It is clear to me, as it must have been clear to those living through those terrible times, that if we had remained on Draenor, our race would likely have died out.
But how we left. . . and why we left . . . this world still bleeds from the wound of that. I do what I can to heal while still safeguarding the interests of this new Horde I have made, but I wonder if these wounds will ever really close. Life for my people: a blessing. How we obtained it: a curse.
The Shadow Council had been nervous, almost as worried sick as Gul'dan had been at Kil'jaeden's departure. But now they had a direction. He called the Council and shared with them the words of the mysterious stranger who called himself Mcdivh. He spoke of the fertile fields, clean water, healthy, glossy-coated prey animals. And he spoke even more glowingly of the beings called
"humans," who would fight enough to be a challenge, but who would inevitably fall to the superiority of the Horde.
"Water, food, killing. And power to those who agree to help bring it about," Gul'dan said, his voice seductive, almost purring. He had gauged them correctly. Their eyes, some red and glowing, some still brown and intense, were focused on him and he saw hope . . . and greed ... on their faces.
The work began.
First, they had to redirect the attention of the starving Horde. Gul'dan was well aware that, with decreasing food supplies and a burning thirst for violence that no longer had an outlet, the ores had started attacking one another. He had Blackhand send out decrees to all the clans, submitting their finest warriors for controlled, one-on-one or small party fights in public display. The winners would receive food from the losing clan, and a supply of pure
water as well as honor and fame. Frantic for something, anything, to case the pain of their dual hunger, for food and for blood, the ores responded well to the suggestion, and Gul'dan was relieved. Mcdivh wanted an army to attack the humans. It would not do if all the ores had slaughtered one another before the invasion.
Durotan continued to give him trouble. The leader of the Frostwolf clan, likely emboldened by the fact that Gul'dan did not cut him down the night of the attack on Shattrath, had begun speaking out more publicly. He decried the staged battles as demeaning.
He called for a way to try to heal the land, stopping just short of dirccdy blaming the warlocks for it. In other words, he danced as close to the line as was possible, and sometimes crossed it.
And, as had always been the case, some were listening. While the Frostwolf clan was the only one whose leader had not drunk the blood of Mannoroth, there were other ores in lower positions who had also refused. The one who worried Gul'dan the most was Orgrim Doomhammer. That one could be trouble. Orgrim had never much liked Blackhand; one day, he might do something
about that dislike. But for the moment, he did not side publicly with the Frostwolves, and indeed was one of the regular victors in the champion battles.
The visions continued. Mcdivh had a very clear idea of what he wanted: a
portal between the two worlds. one that could be created with the Shadow Council and its warlocks on one side, and Mcdivh and whatever magics he was controlling on his side.
They could not work in secret; the portal would have to be large in order for the armies Mcdivh wanted to pass through. Besides, the Horde was feeling defeated. The excitement and challenge of the arena battles and constructing this portal with high ceremony would give them something to focus on.
Mcdivh was pleased with the idea. In one vision, he assumed the form of a large black bird, perching on Gul'dan's arm. Claws dug into his flesh and reddish-black blood trickled across green skin, but the pain felt . . . good. There was a small piece of paper rolled up around the bird's leg. In his vision, Gul'dan unrolled the paper and saw a design that took his breath away. When he awoke, he sketched it on a large parchment.
He surveyed it, eyes bright with anticipation.
"Beautiful," he said.
"I do not understand your displeasure," Orgrim said one day as he and Durotan sat atop their mounts to survey the building of what Gul'dan called the Portal. Everywhere Durotan looked, ores were working. The males were bare to the waist, the females nearly so, and their green skins glistened with sweat underneath a sun that scorched the land. Some of them chanted rhythmic war cries as they worked, others were focused and silent. The road to this plateau, running in an almost straight line from what was starting to become known as Hcllfirc Citadel, was already well paved so that construction equipment could be easily moved.
The shapes of the four large platforms were based on draenei design. The irony did not escape Durotan. The original design had been modified, crowned with the now-familiar spikes and sharp edges that were starting to make orc architecture distinctive. But Durotan could remember walking up similar steps as a boy, and walking up those steps again with the intent of killing all he found atop them. Two obelisks pointed into the sky like sharp spears, and a statue of Gul'dan sat atop another one.
But most forbidding of all was the fourth, set a little way back from the other three. This was to be the framework for the actual Portal that Gul'dan kept promising them would manifest. Two huge slabs of stone towered into the air, a third lying across them to make the most primitive of gateways. Shapes were starting to appear out of the rock, looming shapes of cowled figures on cither side, and some sort of serpent undulated atop it.
"Is this not better than having them ride into your camp and slaughter your clansmen?" Orgrim continued.
Durotan nodded. "Yes, in a way," he said. "But we still do not know what this is a portal to." Orgrim gestured at the sere landscape. The Hcllfire Peninsula was one of the most damaged areas of the world, but far from the only one. "Does it matter? We know what it is a portal from."
Durotan grunted with a hint of amusement. "I suppose you're right at that."
He felt Orgrim's gray eyes regarding him steadily "Durotan ... I have refrained from asking you this, but . . . why did you refuse your clan the draft Gul'dan offered?"
Durotan looked at his friend, answering one question with another. "Why did you yourself not drink?" he countered.
"There was something . . . not right," Orgrim said at last. "I did not like what I saw it doing to the others."
Durotan shrugged, hoping his friend would not press the point. "You had the same insight as I did."
"I wonder," said Orgrim. but he did not question further.
Durotan saw no need to reveal what he knew. He had managed to protect his people from the horrors of what drinking demonic blood would do to them. He had asserted himself to Gul'dan. and thus far. no repercussions had fallen. And Orgrim, ancestors be praised, had had wisdom enough to realize that
there was something amiss and had also declined. For now, that was enough for Durotan, son of Garad. chieftain of the Frostwolf clan.
"I fight today," Orgrim said, changing the subject. "Will you come?"
"I know that you do this not for glory, but for your clan," Durotan said. "You fight to win them food and water. But I will not show my face at these . . . displays. Ores should not be fighting ores. Not even in ritualized combat."
Orgrim sighed. "You have not changed, Durotan. You were ever afraid of me defeating you."
There was a hint of mirth in his voice. Durotan turned, and for the first time in many, many long months, grinned with genuine warmth.
The day had come.
All night, while a ring of warlocks stood guard lest any curious onlooker witness the dark ritual, several stonemasons had been hard at work carving the final seal into the portal's base. Once they had finished, wiping their sweaty brows and turning to smile at one another, they had been quickly slain. The blood of those who had created the seal would prime it, Gul'dan had been informed by Mcdivh. Gul'dan had no reason to doubt his new ally's wisdom. But the luckless masons would not be the last to die here.
The dawn was a fiery one, crimson and orange, and the air was thick and stale. While the portal was being completed over the last several days, other tasks had been finished as well. The war machines that had so devastated Shattrath several months earlier now were again pressed into service, repaired, oiled, and tested. Armor that had been neglected was polished, swords were sharpened, dents hammered out of chest pieces and helms.
The great orcish army that had so decimated the draenei was being reformed.
Some clans had been requested to remain behind. Gul'dan had done his best to convince the chieftains of the Shattered Hand.
Shadowmoon, Thunderlord, Bleeding Hollow, and Laughing Skull clans that they were needed here. Grom and the Warsong had been particularly hard to convince to remain. For a moment, as the chieftain raged at him, Gul'dan wondered if he had done the right thing in letting Hcllscrcam drink the demon blood. More than most, he seemed to have little control over his emotions; despite Gul'dan's flattery about how valuable Grom was to him and how he needed him here, it was Grom's wildncss and unpre-dictability that made Gul'dan want him to stay behind. He could not risk Grom getting some mad idea into his head and defying orders. Mcdivh would not like that; he would not like that at all.
Blackhand had requested that the entire Horde gather at the Hcllfirc Citadel. Over the last few days, several who had returned to their ancestral lands, the Frostwolf clan among them, had trickled in and camped in the area. They had obeyed the order to arm themselves as if they were going into battle, although few of them understood cxacdy what was going on.
They assembled, clan by clan. Each clan wore their traditional colors in the form of a decorative sash or belt over their armor, and on this hot. windy day, their banners snapped proudly.
Gul'dan and Ner'zhul watched the assembly. Gul'dan turned to his former mentor. "You and your clan will be among those staying behind." he said shordy.
Ner'zhul nodded, almost meekly. "So I assumed," he said. He did not say much these days, which was just as well with Gul'dan.
He had half suspected that the older orc would try to wrest control from him after Kil'jaeden had abandoned them, but apparently Ner'zhul was too crushed to even do that. Gul'dan thought with contempt about the time, not so long ago, when he had idolized and envied Ner'zhul. How foolish he had been then. He had grown and learned, even from the bitterness of deception. Although there were times when he thought he caught a faint glimmer of something in Ner'zhul's eyes, as now. He looked sharply at the other orc and decided it was just a trick of the light. He returned his attention to the
assembling clans and smiled.
Even though his designs went far beyond simple bloodletting, he could not help but be stirred at the sight. They were glorious!
The scorching sun glinting on their armor, their banners waving in the wind, their green faces shining with anticipation. If all was as Mcdivh promised, this could be the turning point to greatness. The drums began. Deep, primal, they shuddered along the earth, through stone, into the bones of the Horde. Many of them threw back their heads and howled as they began to march, falling naturally into step with one another, again a unified people.
Gul'dan made no move to hurry. Once they were all assembled at the Portal, he would be magically transported there by another warlock. He could enjoy watching the parade of his army march down the wide, paved road to the Portal.
Standing in front of the Portal was a draenei child.
Where had they found it? Durotan had not so much as glimpsed a draenei in months; nor had anyone else. They must have
considered it great good luck to have found any draenei, let alone a youngling.
They were in the front of the crowd, standing next to the Thundcrlord clan and the Dragonmaw clan. The Portal gate had been finished and looked both beautiful and terrifying. Two cloaked figures, whose eyes glowed red cither from magic or clever technology, flanked the opening. A carved serpentine creature curled about the top, its maw gaping open, showing pointed carved teeth. It extended sharp, lizardlikc claws and had ridges along its long neck and body. Durotan had never seen anything like this, and briefly wondered how such an image had occurred to the masons, A nightmare, possibly? He grimaced. All in all, it was a formidable construction.
But he only barely registered the skill that had gone into its creation. His eyes were transfixed on the young draenei. He looked so terribly small next to the
enormous arch-small, and thin, and bruised. He stared vacantly at the sea of ores who were bellowing at him, so far beyond terror that he obviously felt nothing.
"What are they going to do with it?" Draka wondered aloud.
Durotan shook his head. "I tear the worst," he said.
She stared at him. "I saw some killing of children in battle," she said. "The bloodlust was upon them- I could not condone it, but I could see how it could happen, but surely they will not make a ritual sacrifice out of this child!"
"I hope you are right," said Durotan, but he could see no other reason for the small figure to be present. If such were the case, he could not stand by. He did not want to risk harm to his clan, so he prayed he was wrong.
The warlocks were chanting something now, and to Durotan's amazement, Gul'dan appeared right before their eyes. The Horde murmured, and Gul'dan smiled benevolently at them.
"Today is a glorious day for the ores!" he cried. "You have all seen this Portal being built, admired the craftsmanship and how it stands as a monument to the glory of the Horde. Now, I will reveal to you the visions I have had." He pointed at the gate. "Far, far away, in a land called Azcroth, I have an ally. He offers us his land. It is green and lush, filled with pure water and fat creatures to hunt. Best of all, we will continue to exult in the glory of bloodshed. A race called 'humans,' the enemy of our ally, will try to stop us from taking their lands. We will destroy them. Their dark blood will flow freely upon our swords. As we have destroyed the draenei, so now we will destroy the humans!"
A cheer went up. Draka shook her head in disbelief. "How can they still feel this way? Can they not see this new land will suffer as ours has if we continue on this path?"
Durotan nodded his agreement. "But at the same time, there is no choice. We
need food, water. We must go through this Portal."
Draka sighed, seeing the logic but not liking it.
"Even now, our ally is working to open the Portal on his side. And now. we will begin." He gestured to the little draenei captive.
"Blood is a pure offering to those who give us these vast powers. And the blood of a child is purer still. With the life fluid of our enemies, we will open the Portal and step into a glorious new world-a new page in the history of the Horde!"
He approached the bound child, who looked up at him with empty eyes. Gul'dan raised a jeweled dagger. It glinted in the sunlight.
"No!"
The word was ripped from Durotan's lips. Everyone turned to stare at him. He surged forward. If this new venture was opened by the blood of an innocent child, no good could come of it. He did not make it three steps before he was tackled and went down hard on the sun-baked earth. The instant it happened, he heard Draka utter her war cry and the clang of metal on metal as she charged.
Chaos erupted. He struggled to his feet and beheld the crumpled form of the child. Blue blood spurted from his slashed throat.
"Gul'dan, what have you done to us!" Durotan shrieked, but his protest was lost in the roar of the enraged mob of ores. The Frostwolves had sprung into action to defend their chieftain, and the shouts of battle were almost deafening. Durotan's breath was knocked out of his lungs as his attacker-he could not tell from what clan-resumed the fight. In defense, Durotan lifted his axe and swung. The other dodged, moving more swiftly than Durotan had expected, came up, and
The tenor of the cries abruptly changed as the earth rumbled beneath their feet and a deep, piercing sound shuddered along their bones. The fighting
stopped and as one the ores turned to gaze at the Portal. Moments before, one could look into the area outlined by the pillars and simply see more of the Hcllfirc Peninsula landscape. Now there was a blackness and a swirl ol stars, as if one were looking into a night sky gone mad. Even Durotan's eyes were riveted on the sight. As he watched, the blackness shimmered and reformed itself into a scene that both startled and puzzled him,
Gul'dan had spoken of a beautiful land, rich with fat preybeasts, fertile fields, blue skies. Durotan was indeed looking at a place he had never seen before, but it was a far cry from the idyllic realm Gul'dan had described. It was as moist as Dracnor now was arid, A thick haze floated above brackish water and swaying marshland grasses. A buzzing, chirping sound filled the air. At least, thought Durotan. there was life in this strange place.
Unhappy murmurs ran through die crowd. This was where Gul'dan wanted to send them? It was not much better on first glance than their own land. But then again. Durotan realized, water meant life. Orange though the sky was, not blue, and drenched though the land was. not filled with flowers and meadows, it could support life.
He turned to look at Gul'dan as the murmuring rose in volume. Gul'dan was obviously trying to cover his own shock. He waved his arms for silence.
"Azcroth is a large world, as is our own!" he cried. "You know how different the land can be from place to place. I am certain it is the same here. This place . . . docs not look as inviting as I was . . ." His voice trailed off and he shook himself, visibly recovering.
"But behold, this is in truth another land! It is real! You!"
Gul'dan pointed at two dozen fully armored ores who stood beside the Portal. They snapped to attention. "You have been chosen to be tiic first to investigate this new land. Go forth, in the name of the Horde!"
The ores hesitated only an instant, then grimly ran forward into the Portal.
The scene vanished.
Durotan's head whipped around to stare at Gul'dan. The warlock was doing his best to stay composed, but clearly he had been ratded.
"They are our scouts," Gul'dan said. "They will return with news of this world."
And before the gathered ores could truly begin to grow worried, die image of the swamp reappeared and the ores hurried through.
They were grinning from car to car. More than half of them carried the carcasses of large animals. One was a reptile of some sort, scaly, long-tailed, with stubby legs and huge jaws. The other was a four-legged, furry thing, with claws on all four of its feet, a long tail, small rounded ears and spots on its yellow, glossy coat. Both were obviously healthy specimens.
"We have slain and eaten both typcs of creatures," the leader of the scout said. "Their flesh is wholesome. The water there is pure.
We do not need a beautiful land. We need one that will feed and sustain us. This Azcroth will do so admirably, Gul'dan."
A murmur went through the crowed. Despite himself, Durotan felt his gaze drawn to the beasts the scouts had brought through and his stomach growled. It had been two days since he had eaten. Gul'dan visibly relaxed. He looked over at Durotan, and his eyes narrowed. Durotan tasted apprehension, sharp and bitter, in his throat.
He and his clan were needed. He knew that. He also knew that his defense of the child-and the reaction it had provoked among the other clans, many of whom had come to the defense of the Frostwolves- would not be forgotten. He had half suspected that Gul'dan would order his execution or banishment, but apparendy Durotan and the Frostwolves yet had some use to Gul'dan and Blackhand.
So be it. For now, he would fight alongside his brethren. Tomorrow would have to take care of itself. Whatever betided, Durotan knew he would die with his honor intact.
Gul'dan looked back over the crowd of expectant ores and took a deep breath.
"This is the moment of destiny," he said. "On the other side, a new beginning awaits. A new enemy to slaughter. You can feel it, can you not? The bloodlust rising? Follow Blackhand! Listen to his orders and you will rule this new world as is your right! It's your world on the other side of the Portal. Take it!"
The cries were deafening. The crowd surged forward. Even Durotan found himself caught up in the thrill of a new world, so lush and ripe and ready for the taking. Perhaps his worry was misplaced; perhaps this would indeed be a new beginning. Durotan loved his clan, loved his people. He wanted to see them
thrive. And he, like all ores even before this moment, reveled in the kill.
Perhaps it would all be well.
Axe in hand, hope flourishing in his heart, Durotan joined in the race toward the Portal, toward this place called Azcroth. He lifted his arms and raised the cry that was on the lips of every orc as they surged forward:
"For the Horde!"
Epilogue
And so began our people's history in this world of Azeroth. We thundered out of the Portal like death incarnate, a torrent of blood-mad killers intent on slaughter. It is little wonder the humans hate us so, many of them even now. But perhaps this history I have chronicled will one day be read by human, elven, gnomish, and dwarven eyes. Perhaps they will understand a little better that we, too, knew suffering and victimization.
My father's suspicion that he and his clan were marked for exile proved correct. It was shortly after the Frostwolf clan entered Azeroth that Gul'dan banished them. They were forced to make their homes in the harshness of the mountains of Alterac. The white wolves who still hunt in this place are descended from the Frostwolves who followed my clan through the Portal and whose loyalty could not be swayed by the words of one who bore a grudge.
When I was born, my father realized he had to tell the other ores all he knew about what had been done to them. He approached his old friend, Orgrim Doomhammer, who believed him and would have allied with him had not my father been treacherously slain. When I reached adulthood, I became Orgrim's friend, as had my father before; and it is I who have fulfilled the prophecy of the Doomhammer.
In their honor, this land is named Durotar, its greatest city, Orgrimmar. It is tny hope that-
"My chieftain!" The deep, rough voice belonged to Eitrigg.
Thrall stopped in mid-sentence, moving the pen so it did not drip on the parchment. "What is it?" he asked the elderly orc who was one of his most trusted advisors.
"There is news - news from the Alliance. One of our information gatherers
has learned something he insists you must know." Thrall disliked the term "spy," but he had spies nonetheless, as he was certain Jaina Proudmoorc had her spies in his lands. It was to be expected, and was often worthwhile. Seldom had one of his gatherers insisted on seeing him like this. Something important must be happening indeed.
"Show him in, and leave us," he said. Eitrigg nodded and a moment later, a small, scrawny, nondescript human male was brought in. He looked exhausted, undernourished, and terrified.
Thrall rose to his full imposing height without thinking, then realized he might intimidate the human. "Will you take food or drink?" he asked, keeping his voice gentle.
The spy shook his head, then amended. "W-Water, if you please." in a voice that cracked. The Warchief himself poured a goblet and handed it to the man, who gulped thirstily, then wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
"My thanks. Warchief." the spy said, sounding a bit calmer.
"Your news." Thrall said.
The man paled. Thrall sighed inwardly. He would never be so brutal-or so foolish-as to kill a messenger for bringing bad news.
Such behavior merely resulted in no one's wanting to serve as messenger. He smiled in what he hoped was a reassuring fashion.
"Do not fear. Your news, good or ill, is welcome if it aids me in protecting my people." he said.
The man looked slightly less distressed. He took a deep breath.
"My lord," he said. He hesitated, then continued grimly, "The draenei have come to Azcroth."
Thrall was puzzled. He exchanged glances with Eitrigg, who shrugged.
"Some draenei have been in Azcroth for years." he said. "They are nicknamed the lost ones. We know about them. This is not news, friend."
The man looked stricken. "You don't understand," he said, urgently. "Not those pathetic creatures-
draenei! There-there was ship. From the skies. It crashed like an infernal stone two nights ago."
Thrall inhaled swiftly. No one had missed seeing that strange object in the night sky. looking like a star crashing to earth. So ... it had not been a star, nor even an infernal. It had been a vessel....
The man was still talking. "Proudmoorc has agreed to aid them. There is one among them-pale, noble, his presence
commanding, though he is not physically strong. They call him Velen."
Thrall stared. The draenei? The Prophet Velen? Here?
He sank slowly in his chair as the full significance struck him.
The worst enemy the ores had ever known had come to Azcroth. Had been welcomed into the Alliance.
How could there possibly be peace between Horde and Alliance now?
"Ancestors save us," Thrall whispered.


PROLOGUE: THE DREAMING
The wind shrieked like a child in pain. The herd of shoveltusk huddled together for warmth, their thick, shaggy coats protecting them from the worst of the storm. They formed a circle, with the calves shivering and bleating in the center. Their heads, each crowned with a massive antler, drooped toward the snow-covered earth, eyes shut against the whirling snow. Their own breath frosted their muzzles as they planted themselves and endured. ...In their various dens, the wolves and bears waited out the storms, one with the comfort of their pack, the other solitary and resigned. Whatever their hunger, nothing would drive them forth until after the keening wind had ceased its weeping and the blinding snow had worn itself out.
 
The wind, roaring in from the ocean to beat at the village of Kamagua, tore at the hides that stretched over frames made of the bones of great sea creatures. When the storm passed, the tuskarr whose home this had been for years uncounted knew they would need to repair or replace nets and traps. Their dwellings, sturdy though they were, were always harmed when this storm descended. They had all gathered inside the large group dwelling that had been dug deep into the earth, lacing the flaps tight against the storm and lighting smoky oil lamps. Elder Atuik waited in stoic silence. He had seen many of these storms over the last seven years. Long had he lived, the length and yellowness of his tusks and the wrinkles on his brown skin testament to the fact. But these storms were more than storms, were more than natural. He glanced at the young ones, shivering not with cold, not the tuskarr, but with fear. "He dreams," one of them murmured, eyes bright, whiskers bristling. "Silence," snapped Atuik, more gruffly than he had intended. The child, startled, fell silent, and once again the only sound was the aching sob of the snow and wind.

 It rose like the smoke, the deep bellowing noise, wordless but full of meaning; a chant, carried by a dozen voices. The sounds of drums and rattles and bone striking bone formed a fierce undercurrent to the wordless call. The worst of the wind's anger was deflected from the taunka village by the circle of posts and hides, and the lodges, their curving roofs arching over a large interior space in defiance of the hardships of this land, were strong. Over the sound of deep and ancient ritual, the wind's cry could still be heard. The dancer, a shaman by the name of Kamiku, missed a step and his hoof struck awkwardly. He recovered and continued. Focus. It was all about focus. It was how one harnessed the elements and wrung from them obedience; it was how his people survived in a land that was harsh and unforgiving. Sweat dampened and darkened his fur as he danced. His large brown eyes were closed in concentration, his hooves again finding their powerful rhythm. He tossed his head, short horns stabbing the air, tail twitching. Others danced beside him. Their body heat and that of the fire, burning brightly despite the flakes and wind drifting down from the smoke hole in the roof, kept the lodge warm and comfortable. They all knew what was transpiring outside. They could not control these winds and snow, as they could ordinary such things. No, this was his doing. But they could dance and feast and laugh in defiance of the onslaught. They were taunka; they would endure.
 
The world was blue and white and raging outside, but inside the Great Hall the air was warm and still. A fireplace tall enough for a man to stand in was filled with thick logs, the crackling of their burning the only noise. Over the ornately decorated mantel, carved with images of fantastical creatures, the giant antler of a shoveltusk was mounted. Carved dragon heads served as sconces, holding torches with flames burning bright. Heavy beams supported the feast hall that could have housed dozens, the warm orange hue of the fires chasing away the shadows to hide on the corners. The cold stone of the floor was softened and warmed by thick pelts of polar bears, shoveltusk, and other creatures. A table, long and heavy and carved, occupied most of the space in the
room. It could have hosted three dozen easily. Only three figures sat at the table now: a man, an orc, and a boy. None of it was real, of course. The man who sat at the place of honor at the table, slightly elevated before the other two in a mammoth carved chair that was not quite a throne, understood this. He was dreaming; he had been dreaming for a long, long time. The hall, the shoveltusk trophies, the fire, the table-the orc and the boy-all were simply a part of his dreaming. The orc, on his left, was elderly, but still powerful. The orange fire-and torchlight flickered off the ghastly image he bore on his heavy-jawed face- that of a skull, painted on. He had been a shaman, able to direct and wield vast powers, and even now, even just as a figment of the man's imagination, he was intimidating. The boy was not. Once, he might have been a handsome child, with wide sea-green eyes, fair features, and golden hair. But once was not now. The boy was sick. He was thin, so emaciated that his bones seemed to threaten to slice through the skin. The once-bright eyes were dimmed and sunken, a thin film covering them. Pustules marked his skin, bursting and oozing forth a green fluid. Breathing seemed difficult and the child's chest hitched in little panting gasps. The man thought he could almost see the labored thumping of a heart that should have faltered long ago, but persisted in continuing to beat. "He is still here," the orc said, stabbing a finger in the boy's direction. "He will not last," the man said. As if to confirm the words, the boy began to cough. Blood and mucus spattered the table in front of him, and he wiped a thin arm clad in rotting finery across his pale mouth. He drew breath to speak in a halting voice, the effort obviously taxing him. "You have not-yet won him. And I will-prove it to you." "You are as foolish as you are stubborn," the orc growled. "That battle was won long ago." The man's hands tightened on the arms of his chair as he listened to both of them. This had been a recurring dream over the last few years; he found it now more tiresome than entertaining. "I grow weary of the struggle. Let us end this once and for all." The orc leered at the boy, his skull-face grinning hideously. The boy coughed again, but did not quail from the orc's regard. Slowly, with dignity, he straightened, his milky eyes darting from the orc to the man.
"Yes," the orc said, "this serves nothing. Soon it will be time to awaken. Awaken, and move forward into this world once more." He turned to the man, his eyes gleaming. "Walk again the path you have taken." The skull seemed to detach itself from his face, hovering above it like another entity, and the room changed with its movement. The carved sconces that a moment before were simple wooden dragons undulated and rippled, coming to life, the torches in their mouths flaring and casting grotesque dancing shadows as they shook their heads. The wind screamed outside and the door to the hall slammed open. Snow whirled about the three figures. The man spread his arms and let the freezing wind wrap about him like a cloak. The orc laughed, the skull floating over his face issuing its own manic peals of mirth. "Let me show you that your destiny lies with me, and you can only know true power through eliminating him." The boy, fragile and slight, had been knocked out of his chair by the violent gusts of frigid air. Now he propped himself up with an effort, shaking, his breaths coming in small puffs as he struggled to climb back into his chair. He threw the man a look-of hope, fear, and odd determination. "All is not lost," he whispered, and somehow, despite the orc and the skull's laughter, despite the shrieking of the wind, the man heard him.
PART ONE
THE GOLDEN BOY
CHAPTER ONE
"Hold her head; that's it, lad!" The mare, her normally white coat gray with sweat, rolled her eyes and whickered. Prince Arthas Menethil, only son to King Terenas Menethil II, one day to rule the kingdom of Lordaeron, held fast to the bridle and murmured soothingly. The horse jerked her head violently and almost took the nine-year-old with her. "Whoa, Brightmane," Arthas said. "Easy, girl, it'll be all right. Nothing to worry about." Jorum Balnir grunted in amusement. "doubt you'd feel that way if something the size of this foal was coming out of you, lad." His son Jarim, crouching beside his father and the prince, laughed and so did Arthas, giggling uncontrollably even as hot and soggy foam from Brightmane's champing mouth dropped onto his leg. "One more push, girl," Balnir said, moving slowly along the horse's body to where the foal, encased in a shiny shroudlike membrane, was halfway through its journey into the world. Arthas wasn't really supposed to be here. But when he had no lessons, he often sneaked away to the Balnir farmstead to admire the horses Balnir was known for breeding and to play with his friend Jarim. Both youths were well aware that a horsebreeder's son, even one whose animals were regularly bought as mounts for the royal household, was not a "proper" companion for a prince. Neither cared much, and thus far none of the adults had put a halt to the friendship. And so it was that he had been here, building forts, throwing snowballs, and playing Guards and Bandits with Jarim, when Jorum had called to the boys to come watch the miracle of birth. The "miracle of birth" was actually pretty disgusting, Arthas thought. He hadn't realized there'd be so much...goo involved. Brightmane grunted and heaved again, her legs held stiff and straight out, and with a sloshy wet sound her baby entered the world. Her heavy head thumped down into Arthas's lap, and she closed her eyes
for a moment. Her sides heaved as she caught her breath. The boy smiled, stroking the damp neck and thick, rough mane, and looked over to where Jarim and his father were attending to the foal. It was chilly in the stables at this time of year, and steam rose faintly from its warm, wet body. With a towel and dry hay, father and son rubbed off the last of the foal's unsettling shroudlike covering, and Arthas felt his face stretching in a grin. Damp, gray, all long tangled legs and big eyes, the foal looked around, blinking in the dim lantern light. Those large brown eyes locked with Arthas's. You're beautiful, Arthas thought, his breath stopping for a moment, and realized that the much touted "miracle of birth" really was pretty miraculous. Brightmane began to struggle to her feet. Arthas leaped to his own and pressed back against the wooden walls of the stable so the great animal could turn around without crushing him. Mother and newborn sniffed each other, then Brightmane grunted and began to bathe her son with her long tongue. "Eh, lad, you're a bit worse for wear," said Jorum. Arthas looked down at himself and his heart sank. He was covered in straw and horse spittle. Arthas shrugged. "Maybe I should jump into a snowbank on my way back to the palace," he offered, grinning. Sobering slightly, he said, "Don't worry. I'm nine years old now. I'm no longer a baby. I can go where I-" There was a squawking of chickens and the sound of a man's booming voice, and Arthas's face fell. He squared his small shoulders, made an intense but ultimately ineffectual attempt at brushing off the straw, and strode out of the barn. "Sir Uther," he said in his best I am the prince and you had best remember it voice. "These people have been kind to me. I pray you, don't go trampling their poultry." Or their snapdragon beds, he thought, glancing over at the snow-covered piles of raised earth where the beautiful blooming flowers that were Vara Balnir's pride and joy would burst forth in a few short months. He heard Jorum and Jarim follow him out from the barn, but did not glance behind him, instead regarding the mounted knight, fully clad in- "Armor!" Arthas gasped. "What's happened?" "I'll explain on the way," Uther said grimly. "I'll send someone back for your horse, Prince Arthas. Steadfast can travel faster even with two." He reached down, a large hand closing on Arthas's arm, and swung the boy up in
front of him as if he weighed nothing at all. Vara had come out of the house at the sound of a horse approaching at full gallop. She was wiping her hands off on a towel, and had a smudge of flour on her nose. Her blue eyes were wide, and she looked over at her husband worriedly. Uther nodded politely to her. "We'll discuss this later," Uther said. "Ma'am." He touched his forehead with a mailed hand in courteous salute, then kicked his horse Steadfast- armored as his rider was-and the beast leaped into action. Uther's arm was like a band of steel around Arthas's midsection. Fear bubbled up inside the boy but he pushed it down even as he pushed on Uther's arm. "I know how to ride," he said, his petulance covering up his worry. "Tell me what is going on." "A rider from Southshore has come and gone. He brings ill news. A few days ago, hundreds of small boats filled with refugees from Stormwind landed on our shores," Uther said. He did not remove his arm. Arthas gave up that particular struggle and craned his neck, listening intently, his sea-green eyes wide and fastened on Uther's grim face. "Stormwind has fallen." "What? Stormwind? How? To who? What-" "We'll find all that out shortly. The survivors, including Prince Varian, are being led by Stormwind's onetime Champion, Lord Anduin Lothar. He, Prince Varian, and others will be coming to Capital City in a few days. Lothar has warned us he bears alarming news-obvious enough if something has destroyed Stormwind. I was sent to find you and bring you back. You've no business playing with the common folk at this moment." Stunned, Arthas turned and faced forward again, his hands gripping Steadfast's mane. Stormwind! He had never been there, but had heard tales about it. It was a mighty place, with great stone walls and beautiful buildings. It had been built with sturdiness in mind, to withstand the buffeting of the fierce winds from which it had taken its name. To think that it had fallen- who or what could be strong enough to take such a city? "How many people came with them?" he asked, pitching his voice louder than he really wished to in order to be heard over the drumming of the horse's hooves as they headed back toward the city. "Unknown. Not a small number, that much is certain. The messenger said it was everyone who had survived." Survived what? "And Prince Varian?" He'd heard of Varian all his life, of course, just as
he knew all the names of the neighboring kings, queens, princes, and princesses. Suddenly his eyes widened. Uther had mentioned Varian-but not the prince's father, King Llane- "Will soon become King Varian. King Llane fell with Stormwind." This news of a single tragedy hit Arthas harder somehow than the thought of thousands of people suddenly rendered homeless. Arthas's own family was close-knit-he, his sister, Calia, his mother, Queen Lianne, and of course King Terenas. He'd seen how some rulers behaved with their families, and knew that his was remarkable in the degree of closeness. To have lost your city, your way of life, and your father- "Poor Varian," he said, quick tears of sympathy coming to his eyes. Uther patted his shoulder awkwardly. "Aye," he said. "It is a dark day for the boy." Arthas shivered suddenly, and not from the cold of a bright winter's day. The beautiful afternoon, with its blue sky and softly curving snow-draped landscape, had suddenly darkened for him.
 
A few days later, Arthas was standing up on the castle's ramparts, keeping Falric, one of the guards, company and handing him a steaming hot mug of tea. Such a visit, like the ones Arthas paid to the Balnir family and the castle's scullery maids and valets and blacksmiths and indeed nearly every underling on the royal grounds, was not unusual. Terenas always sighed, but Arthas knew that no one was ever punished for speaking with him, and indeed he sometimes wondered if his father secretly approved. Falric smiled gratefully and bowed deeply in genuine respect, pulling off his gauntlets so the mug would warm his cold hands. Snow threatened, and the sky was a pale gray, but thus far the weather was clear. Arthas leaned against the wall, resting his chin on his folded arms. He looked out over the rolling white hills of Tirisfal, down the road that led through Silverpine Forest to Southshore. The road along which Anduin Lothar, the mage Khadgar, and Prince Varian would be traveling. "Any sign of them?" "Nay, Your Highness," Falric answered, sipping the hot beverage. "It could be today, tomorrow, or the day after. If you're hoping to catch a glimpse, sir, you may be waiting awhile." Arthas shot him a grin, his eyes crinkling with mirth. "Better than
lessons," he said. "Well, sir, you'd know that better than I would," Falric said diplomatically, clearly fighting the impulse to grin back. While the guard finished the tea, Arthas sighed and looked back down the road as he had a dozen times before. This had been exciting at first, but now he was becoming bored. He wanted to go back and find out how Brightmane's foal was, and began wondering how difficult it would be to slip away for a few hours and not be missed. Falric was right. Lothar and Varian might still be a few days away if- Arthas blinked. He slowly lifted his chin from his hands and narrowed his eyes. "They're coming!" he cried, pointing. Falric was at his side immediately, the mug forgotten. He nodded. "Sharp eyes, Prince Arthas! Marwyn!" he called. Another soldier snapped to attention. "Go tell the king that Lothar and Varian are on their way. They should be here within the hour." "Aye, captain," the younger man said, saluting. "I'll do it! I'll go!" said Arthas, already moving as he spoke. Marwyn hesitated, glancing back at his superior officer, but Arthas was determined to beat him. He raced down the steps, slipping on the ice and having to jump the rest of the way, and ran through the courtyard, skidding to a halt as he approached the throne room and barely remembering to compose himself. Today was when Terenas met with representatives of the populace, to listen to their concerns and do what he could to assist them. Arthas flipped back the hood of his beautifully embroidered red runecloth cape. He took a deep breath, letting it escape his lips as soft mist, and nodded as he approached the two guards, who saluted sharply and turned to push open the doors for him. The throne room was significantly warmer than the outside courtyard, even though it was a large chamber formed of marble and stone with a high domed ceiling. Even on overcast days such as this one, the octagonal window at the apex of the dome let in plenty of natural light. Torches in their sconces burned steadily on the walls, adding both warmth and an orange tint to the room. An intricate design of circles enclosing the seal of Lordaeron graced the floor, hidden now by the gathering of people respectfully awaiting their turn to address their liege. Seated in the jeweled throne on a tiered dais was King Terenas II. His fair
hair was touched with gray only at the temples, and his face was slightly lined, with more smile lines than the creased frowns that etched their marks on souls as well as visages. He wore a beautifully tailored robe in hues of blue and purple, wrought with gleaming gold embroidery that caught the torchlight and glinted off his crown. Terenas leaned forward slightly, engrossed in what the man who stood before him-a lesser noble whose name Arthas couldn't recall at the moment-was saying. His eyes, bluegreen and intent, were focused on the man. For a moment, knowing whose coming he was about to announce, Arthas simply stood looking at his father. He, like Varian, was the son of a king, a prince of the blood. But Varian had no father, not anymore, and Arthas felt a lump rise in his throat at the thought of seeing that throne empty, of hearing the ancient song of coronation sung for him. By the Light, please let that day be a long, long time away. Perhaps feeling the intensity of his son's gaze, Terenas glanced over at the door. His eyes crinkled in a smile for a moment, then he returned his attention to the petitioner. Arthas cleared his throat and stepped forward. "Pardon the interruption. Father, they're coming. I saw them! They should be here within the hour." Terenas sobered slightly. He knew who "they" were. He nodded. "Thank you, my son." Those assembled looked at one another; most of them, too, knew who "they" were and they moved as if to end the meeting. Terenas held up a hand. "Nay. The weather holds and the road is clear. They will arrive when they do, and not a moment before. Until then, let us continue." He smiled ruefully. "I have a feeling that once they come, audiences such as this will need to be tabled. Let us finish as much business as we can before that moment." Arthas looked at his father with pride. This was why people loved Terenas so much-and why the king usually turned a blind eye to his son's "adventuring" among the common folk. Terenas cared deeply about the people he ruled, and had instilled that sentiment in his son. "Shall I ride out to meet them, Father?" Terenas scrutinized his son for a moment, then shook his fair head. "No. I think it best if you do not attend this meeting." Arthas felt like he'd been struck. Not attend? He was nine years old! Something very bad had happened to an important ally, and a boy not much older than he had been rendered fatherless by it. He felt a sudden flash of
anger. Why did his father insist on sheltering him so? Why was he not allowed to attend important meetings? He bit back the retort that would have sprung to his lips had he been alone with Terenas. It would not do to argue with his father here, in front of all these people. Even if he was totally and completely in the right on this. He took a deep breath, bowed, and left. An hour later, Arthas Menethil was safely ensconced in one of the many balconies that overlooked the throne room. He grinned to himself; he was still small enough to hide under the seats if anyone poked their nose in for a quick perusal. He fidgeted slightly; another year or two and he wouldn't be able to do this. But in a year or two, surely Father will understand that I deserve to be present at such events, and I won't have to hide. The thought pleased him. He rolled up his cloak and used it as a pillow while he waited. The room was warm from braziers, torches, and the heat of many bodies in a small space. The heat and the soothing murmur of voices in normal discussion lulled him, and he almost fell asleep. "Your Majesty." The voice, powerful, resonant, and strong, jerked Arthas awake. "I am Anduin Lothar, a knight of Stormwind." They were here! Lord Anduin Lothar, the onetime Champion of Stormwind...Arthas edged out from under the seat and rose carefully, making sure he was hidden behind the blue curtain that draped the box, and peeked out. Lothar looked every inch the warrior, Arthas thought as he regarded the man. Tall, powerfully built, he wore heavy armor with an ease that indicated he was well accustomed to its weight. Although his upper lip and jaw sported a thick mustache and short beard, his head was almost bald; what hair he had left had been tied back in a small ponytail. Beside him stood an old man in violet robes. Arthas's gaze fell on the boy who could only be Prince Varian Wrynn. Tall, slender yet but with broad shoulders that promised the slim frame would one day fill out, he looked pale and exhausted. Arthas winced as he regarded the youth, a few years older than he, looking lost, alone, and frightened. When addressed, Varian recovered and gave the polite requisite replies. Terenas was an old hand at knowing how to make people feel comfortable. Quickly he dismissed all but a few courtiers and guards and rose from his
throne to greet the visitors. "Please, be seated," he said, choosing not to sit in the glorious throne as was his right but instead perching on the top stair of the dais. He drew Varian down beside him in a fatherly gesture. Arthas smiled. Hidden away, the young prince of Lordaeron watched and listened closely, and the voices that floated up to him spoke words that sounded almost fanciful. Yet as he regarded this mighty warrior of Stormwind-and even more, as he studied the wan visage of the future king of such a magnificent realm-Arthas realized with a creeping feeling that none of this was fantasy; all of it was deathly real, and it was terrifying. The men gathered spoke of creatures called "orcs" that had somehow infested Azeroth. Huge, green, with tusks for teeth and lusting for blood, they had formed a "horde" that flowed like a seemingly unstoppable tide -"Enough to cover the land from shore to shore," Lothar said direly. It was these monsters that had attacked Stormwind and made refugees-or corpses, Arthas realized-of its denizens. Things got heated when some courtier or other clearly didn't believe Lothar. Lothar's temper rose, but Terenas defused the situation and brought the meeting to a close. "I will summon my neighboring kings," he said. "These events concern us all. Your Majesty, I offer you my home and my protection for as long as you shall need it." Arthas smiled. Varian was going to stay here, in the palace, with him. It would be nice to have another noble boy to play with. He got along well enough with Calia, who was two years his elder, but, well, she was a girl, and while he was fond of Jarim, he knew that their opportunities to play together were perforce limited. Varian, however, was a prince of the blood, just like Arthas, and they could spar together, and ride, and go exploring- "You're telling us to prepare for war." His father's voice cut in on his thoughts with brutal efficiency, and Arthas's mood grew somber again. "Yes," Lothar replied. "A war for the very survival of our race." Arthas swallowed hard, then left the viewing box as silently as he had come.
 
As Arthas had expected, a short time later Prince Varian was shown into the guest quarters. Terenas himself accompanied the boy, resting a hand gently on the youth's shoulder. If he was surprised to see his son waiting in the guest quarters, he did not show it.
"Arthas. This is Prince Varian Wrynn, future king of Stormwind." Arthas bowed to his equal. "Your Highness," he said formally, "I bid you welcome to Lordaeron. I only wish the circumstances were happier." Varian returned the bow gracefully. "As I told King Terenas, I am grateful for your support and friendship during these difficult times." His voice was stiff, strained, weary. Arthas took in the cape, tunic, and breeches, made of runecloth and mageweave and beautifully embroidered. It looked as though Varian had been wearing them for half his life, so dirty were they. His face had clearly been scrubbed, but there were traces of dirt at his temples and beneath his nails. "I will send up some servants shortly with some food and towels, hot water and a tub, so that you may refresh yourself, Prince Varian." Terenas continued to use the boy's title; that would wear off with time, but Arthas understood why the king emphasized it now. Varian needed to keep hearing that he was still respected, still royal, when he had lost absolutely everything but his life. Varian pressed his lips together and nodded. "Thank you," he managed. "Arthas, I leave him in your care." Terenas squeezed Varian's shoulder reassuringly, then departed, closing the door. The two boys stared at each other. Arthas's mind was a total blank. The silence stretched uncomfortably. Finally Arthas blurted, "I'm sorry about your father." Varian winced and turned away, walking toward the huge windows that overlooked Lordamere Lake. The snow that had been threatening all morning was finally coming, drifting softly downward to cover the land with a silent blanket. It was too bad-on a clear day, you could see all the way to Fenris Keep. "Thank you." "I'm sure he died fighting nobly and gave as good as he got." "He was assassinated." Varian's voice was blunt and emotionless. Arthas whirled to look at him, shocked. His features, in profile to Arthas now and lit by the cold light of a winter's day, were unnaturally composed. Only his eyes, bloodshot and brown and filled with pain, seemed alive. "A trusted friend managed to get him to speak with her alone. Then she killed him. Stabbed him right in the heart." Arthas stared. Death in glorious battle was difficult enough to handle, but this- Impulsively he placed a hand on the other prince's arm. "I saw a foal
being born yesterday," he said. It sounded inane, but it was the first thing that sprang to his mind and he spoke earnestly. "When the weather lets up, I'll take you to see him. He's the most amazing thing." Varian turned toward him and gazed at him for a long moment. Emotions flitted across his face-offense, disbelief, gratitude, yearning, understanding. Suddenly the brown eyes filled with tears and Varian looked away. He folded his arms and hunched in on himself, his shoulders shaking with sobs he did his best to muffle. They came out anyway, harsh, racking sounds of mourning for a father, a kingdom, a way of life that he probably hadn't been able to grieve until this precise minute. Arthas squeezed his arm and felt it rigid as stone beneath his fingers. "I hate winter," Varian sobbed, and the depth of the hurt conveyed by those three simple words, a seeming non sequitor, humbled Arthas. Unable to watch such raw pain, yet powerless to do anything about it, he dropped his hand, turned away, and stared out the window. Outside, the snow continued to fall.
CHAPTER TWO
Arthas was frustrated. He thought when word had come about the orcs that he'd finally begin serious training, perhaps alongside his new best friend, Varian. Instead, exactly the opposite happened. The war against the Horde resulted in everyone who could swing a sword joining the armed forces, right down to the master blacksmith. Varian took pity on his younger counterpart and did what he could for a while, until at last he sighed and looked sympathetically at Arthas. "Arthas, I don't want to sound mean, but..." "But I'm terrible." Varian grimaced. The two were in the armory hall, sparring with helms, leather chest pieces, and wooden training swords. Varian went to the rack and hung up the training sword, removing his helm as he spoke. "I'm just surprised, because you're athletic and fast." Arthas sulked; he knew Varian well enough to know that the older prince was trying to soften the blow. He followed sullenly, hanging up his own sword and unfastening his protective gear. "In Stormwind, we start training when we're quite young. By the time I was your age I had my own set of armor specifically designed for me." "Don't rub it in," Arthas grumbled. "Sorry." Varian grinned at him, and Arthas reluctantly gave a small smile back. Although their first meeting had been laced with grief and awkwardness, Arthas had discovered that Varian had a strong spirit and a generally optimistic outlook. "I just wonder why your father didn't do the same for you." Arthas knew. "He's trying to protect me." Varian sobered as he hung up his leather chest piece. "My father tried to protect me, too. Didn't work. The realities of life have a way of intruding." He looked at Arthas. "I'm trained to fight. I'm not trained to teach fighting. I might hurt you."
Arthas flushed. No suggestion that Arthas might hurt him. Varian seemed to see that he was only digging himself deeper into a hole with the younger boy and clapped him on the shoulder. "Tell you what. When the war's over, and a proper trainer can be spared again, I'll come with you to talk to King Terenas. I'm sure you'll be handing me my rear in no time."
 
The war eventually did end, and the Alliance was triumphant. The leader of the Horde, the once-mighty Orgrim Doomhammer, had been brought back to Capital City in chains. It had made a big impression on both Arthas and Varian, to see the powerful orc paraded through Lordaeron. Turalyon, the young paladin lieutenant who had defeated Doomhammer after the orc had slain the noble Anduin Lothar, had shown mercy in choosing to spare the beast; Terenas, who was at heart a kindly man, continued in that fashion by forbidding attacks on the creature. Jeers, boos, yes-seeing the orc who had terrorized them for so long now powerless, an object of scorn and derision, heartened morale. But Orgrim Doomhammer would not be harmed while in his care. It was the only time Arthas had seen Varian's face ugly with hate, and he supposed he could not blame the other boy. If orcs had murdered Terenas and Uther, he supposed he'd want to spit on the ugly green things, too. "He should be killed," Varian growled, his eyes angry as they watched from the parapets as Doomhammer was marched toward the palace. "And I wish I could be the one to do it." "He's going to the Undercity," said Arthas. The ancient royal crypts, dungeons, sewers, and twining alleys deep below the palace had somehow gotten that nickname, as if the place was simply another destination. Dark, dank, filthy, the Undercity was intended only for prisoners or the dead, but the poorest of the poor in the land somehow always seemed to find their way in. If one was homeless, it was better than freezing in the elements, and if one needed something...not entirely legal, even Arthas understood that that was where you went to get it. Now and then the guards would go down and make a sweep of the place in a desperate and ultimately futile attempt to clean it out. "No one ever gets out from the Undercity," Arthas reassured his friend. "He'll die in captivity." "Too good for him," Varian said. "Turalyon should have killed him when
he had the chance." Varian's words were prophetic. The great orcish leader had only appeared to be humbled by the scorn and hatred heaped upon him. It turned out he was far from broken. Lured by his dispiritedness, or so Arthas gleaned by eavesdropping, the guards had grown lax in their care of him. No one was quite sure how Orgrim Doomhammer's escape had been engineered, because no one survived to report on it-every guard he encountered had gotten his neck broken. But there was a trail of bodies, that of guards, indigents, and criminals-Doomhammer did not discriminate-leading from the wide-open cell through the Undercity to the single escape route-the foul-smelling sewers. Doomhammer was captured again shortly thereafter, and this time placed in the internment camps. When he escaped from there, too, the Alliance collectively held its breath, waiting for a renewed attack. None came. Either Doomhammer was finally dead, or they had shattered his fighting spirit after all. Two years had come and gone, and now it looked like the Dark Portal through which the Horde had entered Azeroth the first time-the portal that the Alliance had shut down at the end of the Second War-was going to be reopened. Or had already been reopened, Arthas wasn't sure which, because nobody apparently seemed to want to bother to tell him anything. Even though he was going to become king one day. It was a beautiful day, sunny and clear and warm. Part of him wanted to be outside with his new horse, whom he had named Invincible-the same foal he had seen being born on that bitter winter day two years ago. Maybe he'd do that later. But for now, his footsteps took him to the armory, where he and Varian had sparred and Varian had embarrassed him. The slight was unintended, to be sure, but it stung all the same. Two years. Arthas walked over to the rack of wooden training swords and took one down. At eleven, he had had what his governess called a "growth spurt"-at least she'd called it that the last time he had seen her, when she wept and hugged him and declared him "a proper young man now" and no longer in need of a governess. The little sword he had trained with at nine was a child's sword. He was indeed a proper young man, standing at five foot eight and likely to grow even taller if his heritage was any indication. He hefted the sword, swinging it this way and that, and suddenly grinned. He advanced on one of the old suits of armor, gripping the sword firmly.
"Hoy!" he called, wishing it was one of the disgusting green monsters that had been such a thorn in his father's side for so long. He drew himself up to his full height, and lifted the tip of the sword to the suit of armor's throat. "Think you to pass here, vile orc? You are in Alliance lands! I will show you mercy this once. Begone and never return!" Ah, but orcs didn't understand surrender, or honor. They were just brutes. So it would refuse to kneel and show him respect. "What? You will not depart? I have given you a chance, but now, we fight!" And he lunged, as he had seen Varian do. Not directly at the armor, no, the thing was very old and very valuable, but right beside it. Strike, block, duck in under the swing, bring the sword all the way across the body, then whirl and- He gasped as the sword seemed to take on a life of its own and flew across the room. It landed loudly on the marble floor, sliding along with a grating sound before slowly spinning to a stop. Dammit! He looked toward the door-and right into the face of Muradin Bronzebeard. Muradin was the dwarven ambassador to Lordaeron, brother to King Magni Bronzebeard and a great favorite at court for his jovial, no-nonsense approach to everything from fine ale and pastries to matters of state. He had a reputation as an excellent warrior as well, cunning and fierce in battle. And he had just watched the future king of Lordaeron pretend to fight orcs and throw his sword clear across the room. Arthas felt his whole body break out in a sweat, and he knew his cheeks were pink. He tried to recover. "Um...Ambassador...I was just..." The dwarf coughed and looked away. "I'm lookin' fer yer father, boy. Can ye direct me? This infernal place has too many turns." Arthas mutely pointed to a stairway on his left. He watched the dwarf go. No other words were exchanged. Arthas had never been more embarrassed in his life. Tears of shame burned in his eyes, and he blinked them back hard. Without even bothering to put away the wooden sword, he fled the room. Ten minutes later, he was free, riding out of the stables and heading east into the hills of Tirisfal Glades. He had two horses with him: a gentle, elderly dapple-gray gelding called Trueheart upon which he was mounted and, on a training lead, the two-year-old colt Invincible.
He'd felt the bond between them from the moment they had locked eyes, moments after the foal's birth. Arthas had known then that this would be his steed, his friend, the great horse with a great heart who would be as much a part of him as-no, more than-his armor or weapons. Horses from good stock such as this one could live twenty years or more if cared for well; this was the mount who would bear Arthas elegantly in ceremony and faithfully on daily rides. He was not a warhorse. Such were a breed apart, used only for specific purposes at specific times. He'd have one when he went into battle. But Invincible would, and indeed already had, become part of his life. The stallion's coat, mane, and tail, gray at his birth, had turned white as the snow that had coated the ground on that day. It was a color that was rare even among the Balnir-bred horses, whose "white" coats were really mostly just light gray. Arthas had toyed with names like "Snowfall" or "Starlight," but in the end, he followed the informal tradition of Lordaeron knights and gave his steed the name of a quality. Uther's mount was "Steadfast," Terenas's "Courageous." His was "Invincible." Arthas wanted desperately to ride Invincible, but the horsemaster warned that two years old was at least a year too young. "Two's a baby," he'd said. "They're still growing; their bones are still forming. Be patient, Your Highness. Another year isn't that long to wait for a horse that'll serve you well for two decades." But it was a long time to wait. Too long. Arthas glanced back over his shoulder at the horse, growing impatient with the plodding canter that seemed the most that Trueheart could summon. In contrast with the elderly gelding, the two-year-old moved almost as if floating, with hardly any effort. His ears were pricked forward, and his nostrils flared as he scented the smells of the glade. His eyes were bright and he seemed to be saying, Come on, Arthas.... It's what I was born for. Surely one ride couldn't hurt. Just a little canter, and then back to the stables as if nothing had happened. He slowed Trueheart to a walk and tied the reins to a low-slung tree branch. Invincible whickered as Arthas walked up to him. The prince grinned at the velvety softness of the muzzle brushing his palm as he fed the horse a piece of apple. Invincible was used to having a saddle; it was part of the slow and patient breaking process, to get the horse accustomed to having something on its back. But an empty saddle was much different from a live
human being. Still, he'd spent a lot of time with the animal. Arthas said a short prayer and then quickly, before Invincible could sidestep out of the way, vaulted onto the horse's back. Invincible reared, neighing furiously. Arthas wrapped his hands in the wiry mane and clung like a burr with every inch of his long legs. The horse hopped and bucked, but Arthas held on. He yelped as Invincible tried to scrape him off by running beneath one of the branches, but did not let go. And then Invincible was galloping. Or rather, he was flying. Or at least so it seemed to the giddy young prince, who crouched low on the horse's neck and grinned widely. He'd never been on an animal this fast before, and his heart pounded with excitement. He didn't even try to control Invincible; it was all he could do to simply hang on. It was glorious, wild, beautiful, everything he'd dreamed of. They would- Before he even realized what had happened, Arthas was hurtling through the air to land hard on the grassy earth. For a long moment he couldn't breathe from the impact. Slowly he got to his feet. His body ached, but nothing was broken. But Invincible was a rapidly disappearing dot in the distance. Arthas swore violently, kicking a hillock and balling his fists. He was in for it now.
 
Sir Uther the Lightbringer was waiting for him upon his return. Arthas grimaced as he slid off Trueheart and handed the reins to a groomsman. "Invincible came back a short time ago by himself. He had a nasty cut on his leg, but I'm sure you'll be glad to know the horsemaster says he'll be fine." Arthas debated lying, telling Uther they'd been spooked and Invincible had fled. But it was obvious from the grass stains on his clothes that he'd fallen, and Uther would never believe that the prince couldn't stay on gentle old Trueheart, spooked or not. "You know you were not supposed to ride him yet," Uther continued inexorably. Arthas sighed. "I know." "Arthas, do you not understand? If you put too much pressure on him at this age he-" "I get it, all right? I could cripple him. It was just the one time."
"And that's all it will be, isn't it?" "Yes, sir," Arthas said, sullenly. "You missed your lessons. Again." Arthas was silent and did not look up at Uther. He was angry, embarrassed, and hurting, and wanted nothing more than a hot bath and some briarthorn tea to ease the pain. His right knee was starting to swell. "At least you are in time for the prayer session this afternoon." Uther eyed him up and down. "Though you'll need to wash up." Arthas was indeed sweaty and knew he smelled like horse. It was a good smell, he thought. An honest one. "Hurry up. We'll be assembling in the chapel." Arthas wasn't even sure what the prayer session was focusing on today. He felt vaguely bad about that; the Light was important to both his father and Uther, and he knew that they badly wanted him to be as devout as they were. But while he couldn't argue with the evidence of his own eyes-the Light was most definitely real; he'd seen priests and the new order of the paladins work true miracles with healing and protection-he'd never felt called to sit and meditate for hours as Uther did, or make frequent references in reverent tones as did his father. It was just...there. An hour later, scrubbed and changed into an outfit that was simple yet elegant, Arthas hurried to the small family chapel in the royal wing. It was not a large room, but it was beautiful. It was a miniature version of the traditional chapel style that could be seen in every human town, perhaps a trifle more lavish with regard to the details. The chalice that was shared was finely wrought of gold and inlaid with gems; the table upon which it lay, an antique. Even the benches had comfortable padding, while the common folk had to make do with flat wooden ones. He realized as he entered quietly that he was the last-and winced as he recalled that several important personages were visiting his father. In addition to the regular attendees-his family, Uther, and Muradin-King Trollbane was present, though he looked even less happy than Arthas to be here. And... someone else. A girl, slender and straight with long blond hair, her back turned to him. Arthas peered at her, curious, and bumped into one of the benches. He might as well have dropped a plate. Queen Lianne, still a beauty in her early fifties, turned at the sound, smiling affectionately at her son. Her gown was perfectly arranged, her hair pulled back in a golden coif from which no unruly tendril escaped. Calia, fourteen and looking as gawky and
coltish as Invincible had been at his birth, shot him a scowl. Evidently, word of his misdeeds had gotten out-or else she was just angry with him at being late. Terenas nodded at him, then returned his eyes to the bishop giving the service. Arthas cringed inwardly at the quiet disapproval in that gaze. Trollbane paid him no mind, and Muradin, too, did not turn. Arthas slouched down onto one of the benches against the back wall. The bishop began to speak and lifted his hands, limned with a soft, white radiance. Arthas wished the girl would turn a little so he could catch a glimpse of her face. Who was she? Obviously the daughter of a noble or someone else of high rank, else she would not be invited to attend private family services. He thought about who she might be, more interested in discovering her identity than in the words of the service. "...and His Royal Highness, Arthas Menethil," intoned the bishop. Arthas jerked to attention, wondering if he'd missed something important. "May the Light's blessing be upon him in every thought, word, and deed, so that he may thrive beneath it and grow to serve it as its paladin." Arthas felt a sudden calming warmth flow through him as the blessing was laid upon him. The stiffness and soreness vanished, leaving him refreshed and at peace. The bishop turned to the queen and the princess. "May the Light shine on Her Royal Majesty, Lianne Menethil, that she-" Arthas grinned and waited for the bishop to complete the individual blessings. He'd name the girl then. Arthas leaned against the back room of the wall. "And we humbly request the Light's blessing on Lady Jaina Proudmoore. May she be blessed with its healing and wisdom, that she-" Aha! The mystery girl was a mystery no longer. Jaina Proudmoore, a year younger than he, daughter to Admiral Daelin Proudmoore, naval war hero and ruler of Kul Tiras. What did intrigue him was why she was here and- "-and that her studies at Dalaran go well. We ask that she become a representative of the Light, and that in the role of a mage, she will serve her people well and truly." That made sense. She was on her way to Dalaran, the beautiful city of magi not too far from Capital City. Knowing the rigid rules of etiquette and hospitality that were so pervasive in royal and noble circles, she'd be here for a few days before traveling on. This, he thought, could be fun. At the end of the service, Arthas, already located near the door, stepped
out first. Muradin and Trollbane were the first out, both looking slightly relieved that the service was over. Terenas, Uther, Lianne, Calia, and Jaina followed. Both his sister and the Proudmoore girl were fair haired and slender. But the resemblance stopped there. Calia was delicately boned, with a face right out of old paintings, pale skinned and soft. Jaina, however, had bright eyes and a lively smile, and she moved like someone who was well accustomed to riding and hiking. She obviously spent a great deal of time out of doors, as her face was tanned with a smattering of sprinkles across her nose. This, Arthas decided, was a girl who would not mind getting a snowball in the face, or going for a swim on a hot day. Someone, unlike his sister, he could play with. "Arthas-a word wi' ye," came a gruff voice. Arthas turned to see the ambassador peering up at him. "Of course, sir," Arthas said, his heart sinking. All he wanted to do was talk to this new friend-he was already sure they would get along famously -and Muradin probably wanted to scold him again for the embarrassing display earlier in the armory. At least the dwarf was discreet enough to walk a few paces away. He turned to face the prince, stubby thumbs hooked into his belt, gruff face knotted in thought. "Lad," he said, "I'll get right tae th' point. Yer fightin' form is terrible." Again, Arthas felt the blood rush to his face. "I know," he said, "but Father-" "Yer father has many things on 'is mind. Dinna ye be saying a thing against 'im." Well, what was he supposed to say? "Well I can't very well teach myself fighting. You saw what happened when I tried." "I ken tha'. I'll teach ye if ye like." "You-you will?" Arthas was at first disbelieving, then delighted. The dwarves were renowned for their fighting prowess, among many things. Part of Arthas wondered if Muradin would also teach him how to hold his ale, another thing dwarves were known for, but he decided not to ask that. "Aye, that's what I said, wasn't it? I've spoken wi' yer father, an' he's all for it. Been put off long enough as it is. But let's get one thing straight. I'll take nae excuses. And I'll be pushin' ye right hard. And if at any moment I say tae mesel', 'Muradin, ye're wastin' yer time,' I stop. D'ye agree, boy?"
Arthas fought back an incongruous giggle at the thought of someone who stood so much shorter than he calling him "boy," but bit it back. "Yes, sir," he said fervently. Muradin nodded and stuck out a large, calloused hand. Arthas shook it. Grinning, he glanced up at his father, who was deep in conversation with Uther. They turned as one to regard him, both pairs of eyes narrowing in speculation, and inwardly Arthas sighed. He knew that look. So much for playing with Jaina-he'd probably not have time to even see her again before she left. He turned to watch as Calia, her arm around the younger girl's shoulder, swept Jaina from the room. But right before she disappeared through the doorway, Admiral Proudmoore's daughter turned her golden head, caught Arthas's gaze with her own, and smiled.
CHAPTER THREE
"I'm very proud of you, Arthas," said his father. "Stepping up to the responsibility like this." In the week that Jaina Proudmoore had been with the Menethil family as an honored guest, "responsibility" had been the watchword. Not only had his training with Muradin begun-and it was every bit as rigorous and demanding as the dwarf had warned, the pain of sore muscles and bruises augmented by the occasional ringing cuff on the ear when Arthas was not paying sufficient attention for Muradin's liking-but as Arthas had feared, Uther and Terenas also decided it was time that the prince's training was stepped up in other areas. Arthas would rise before dawn, grab a quick breakfast of bread and cheese, and go on an early ride with Muradin. The ride would end in a hike, and it was the twelve-year-old youth who always ended up shaking and winded. Arthas secretly wondered if the dwarves had such an affinity with stones that the very earth made it easy for them to climb it. Back home, bath, lessons in history, mathematics, and calligraphy. A midday meal, then it was all afternoon in the chapel with Uther, praying, meditating, and discussing the nature of paladins and the rigorous disciplines they must observe. dinner, and then Arthas stumbled into bed to sleep the deep dreamless sleep of the utterly exhausted. He'd seen Jaina only a few times at dinner, and she and Calia seemed to be thick as thieves. Arthas finally decided enough was enough, and, taking the lessons in history and politics that were being drilled into his head, he approached his father and Uther with the offer to escort their guest, Lady Jaina Proudmoore, to dalaran himself. He didn't bother to tell them it was because he wanted to get out of his duties. It pleased Terenas to think of his son as being so responsible, Jaina smiled brightly at the prospect, and it got Arthas exactly what he wanted. Everyone was happy. And so it was that in early summer, when the flowers were blooming, the woods were full of game, and the sun danced above them in a sky of bright
blue, Prince Arthas Menethil was accompanying a brightly smiling, blond, young lady on a journey to the wondrous city of magi. They'd gotten a little late of a start-one thing Arthas was starting to learn about Jaina Proudmoore was that she was not exactly punctual-but Arthas didn't mind. He was in no hurry. They weren't alone, of course. Propriety demanded that Jaina's lady-in-waiting and a guard or two ride escort. But still, the servants hung back and let the two young nobles become acquainted. They rode for a while, then stopped for a picnic lunch. While they were munching on bread, cheese, and watered wine, one of Arthas's men came up to him. "Sir, with your permission, we will make preparations to spend the night in Ambermill. On the morrow, we can push on the rest of the way to Dalaran. We should arrive there by nightfall." Arthas shook his head. "No, let's continue. We can camp overnight in the Hillsbrad area. That will get Lady Jaina to Dalaran by mid-morning tomorrow." He turned to smile at her. She smiled back, though he caught a hint of disappointment in her eyes. "Are you sure, sir? We've planned on accepting the hospitality of the locals, not subjecting the lady to sleeping out in the open." "It's fine, Kayvan," Jaina spoke up. "I'm not a fragile little figurine." Arthas's smile widened into a grin. He hoped she'd feel that way in a few hours.
 
While the servants set up camp, Arthas and Jaina went exploring. They scrambled up a hill that gave them an unparalleled view. To the west, they could see the little farming community of Ambermill and even the distant spires of Baron Silverlaine's keep. To the east, they could almost make out Dalaran itself, and more clearly, the internment camp to its south. Since the end of the Second War, the orcs had been rounded up and placed into these camps. It was more merciful than simply slaughtering them on sight, Terenas had explained to Arthas. And besides, the orcs seemed to be suffering from a strange malaise. Most of the time when humans stumbled upon them, or hunted them, they fought only halfheartedly and went into internment peacefully. There were several camps just like this one. They had a rustic meal of roasted rabbit on a spit and retired shortly after dark. Once he was assured that everyone was asleep, Arthas threw a tunic
over his breeches and quickly tugged on his boots. As an afterthought, he took one of his daggers and fastened it to his belt, then crept over to Jaina. "Jaina," he whispered, "wake up." She awoke in silence and unafraid, her eyes glinting in the moonlight. He squatted back as she sat up, putting a finger to his lips. She spoke in a whisper. "Arthas? Is something wrong?" He grinned. "You up for an adventure?" She tilted her head. "What sort of an adventure?" "Trust me." Jaina looked at him for a moment, then nodded. "All right." She, like all of them, had gone to sleep mostly dressed and simply needed to pull on her boots and cloak. She rose, made a halfhearted attempt to comb her fingers through her blond hair, and nodded. Jaina followed him as they ascended the same ridge they had explored earlier that day. The climb was more challenging at night, but the moonlight was quite bright and their feet did not slip. "There's our destination," he said, pointing. Jaina gulped. "The internment camp?" "Have you ever seen one up close?" "No, and I don't want to." He frowned, disappointed. "Come on, Jaina. It's our one chance to get a good look at an orc. Aren't you curious?" Her face was hard to read in the moonlight, her eyes dark pools of shadow. "I-they killed Derek. My older brother." "One of them killed Varian's father, too. They've killed a lot of people, and that's why they're in these camps. It's the best place for them. A lot of people don't like the fact that my father is raising taxes to pay for the camps, but-come on and judge for yourself. I missed a chance to get a good look at Doomhammer when he was in the Undercity. I don't want to miss a chance to see one now." She was silent, and at last he sighed. "All right, I'll take you back." "No," she said, surprising him. "Let's go." Quietly they made their descent. "All right," Arthas whispered. "When we were up here earlier, I made note of their patrols. It doesn't look like they're much different at night, except maybe even more infrequent. With the orcs not having much spirit left in them, I guess the guards think that the chances of escape aren't that likely." He smiled at her reassuringly. "Which
works out well for us. Other than patrols, someone is always stationed in those two watchtowers. They're the ones we have to be most careful of, but hopefully they'll be looking for any disturbance to come from the front rather than behind, since the camp backs up against a sheer wall face. Now, let this fellow here complete his circuit, and we should have ample time to get close to that wall right there and take a good look." They waited for the bored-looking guard to meander past, then a few more breaths after that. "Put your hood up," Arthas said. Both had fair hair, and it would be far too easy for the guards to spot. Jaina looked nervous but excited, and obeyed. Fortunately both she and Arthas wore cloaks of a dark shade. "Ready?" She nodded. "Good. Let's go!" They slipped quickly and quietly down the rest of the way. Arthas held her back for a moment until the guard in the tower was looking in the other direction, then motioned to her. They ran forward, making sure their hoods were securely in place, and a few steps later they were pressing against the wall of the camp. The camps were rough but efficient. They were made of wood, little more than logs fastened together, sharpened at the top and embedded deep into the ground. There were plenty of chinks in the "wall" that a curious boy and girl could look through. It was hard to see at first, but there were several large shapes inside. Arthas turned his head for a better look. They were orcs all right. Some of them were on the ground, curled up and covered by blankets. Some walked here and there, almost aimlessly, like animals in cages, but lacking a caged beast's almost palpable yearning for freedom. Over there was what looked like a family unit-a male, a female, and a young one. The female, slighter and shorter than the male, held something small to her chest, and Arthas realized it was an infant. "Oh," whispered Jaina beside him. "They look...so sad." Arthas snorted, then remembered the need to be quiet. He quickly glanced up at the tower, but the guard had heard nothing. "Sad? Jaina, these brutes destroyed Stormwind. They wanted to render humankind extinct. They killed your brother, for Light's sake. Don't waste any pity on them." "Still-somehow I didn't think they would have children," Jaina continued. "Do you see the one with the baby?" "Well of course they have children, even rats have children," Arthas said. He was irritated, but then, maybe he should have expected a reaction like that
from an eleven-year-old girl. "They look harmless enough. Are you sure they belong here?" She turned her face to his, a white oval in the moonlight, seeking his opinion. "It's expensive to keep them here. Maybe they should be released." "Jaina," he said, keeping his voice soft, "they're killers. Even if right now they're lethargic, who can say what would happen if they're released?" She sighed softly in the darkness and didn't answer. Arthas shook his head. He'd seen enough-the guard would be back shortly. "Ready to go back?" She nodded, stepping away and running quickly with him back toward the hill. Arthas glanced over his shoulder and saw the guard start to turn. He dove toward Jaina, grabbed her around the waist, and shoved her to the ground, hitting hard beside her. "Don't move," he said, "the guard is looking right at us!" Despite the rough fall Jaina was smart enough to freeze at once. Carefully, keeping his face as shadowed as possible, Arthas turned his head to look at the guard. He couldn't see a face at this distance, but the man's posture bespoke boredom and weariness. After a long moment, during which Arthas heard his heart thundering in his ears, the guard turned to face the other direction. "Sorry about that," Arthas apologized, helping Jaina to her feet. "You all right?" "Yes," Jaina said. She grinned at him. They were back in their respective sleeping areas a few moments later. Arthas looked up at the stars, completely satisfied. It had been a good day.
 
Late that next morning, they arrived at Dalaran. Arthas had never been there before, though of course had heard a great deal about it. The magi were a private and mysterious lot-quite powerful, but they kept to themselves save when needed. Arthas remembered when Khadgar had accompanied Anduin Lothar and Prince-now King-Varian Wrynn to speak with Terenas, to warn them of the orcish threat. His presence had lent weight to Anduin's statements, and with good reason. Magi of the Kirin Tor didn't get involved in ordinary politics. Nor did they do the ordinary political maneuvering such as inviting
royalty to enjoy their hospitality. It was only because Jaina was coming to study that Arthas and his retinue were permitted admittance. Dalaran was beautiful, even more glorious than Capital City. It seemed almost impossibly clean and bright, as a city based so deeply on magic ought to be. There were several graceful towers reaching skyward, their bases white stone and their apexes violet encircled with gold. Many had radiant, hovering stones dancing around them. Others had windows of stained glass that caught the sunlight. Gardens bloomed, the fragrances from wild, fantastical flowers providing a scent so heady Arthas was almost dizzy. Or maybe it was the constant thrum of magic in the air that caused the sensation. He felt very ordinary and dingy as they rode into the city, and almost wished they hadn't slept outside last night. If they had stayed at Ambermill, at least he'd have had a chance to have bathed. But then, he and Jaina wouldn't have gotten a chance to spy on the internment camp. He glanced at his companion. Her blue eyes were wide with awe and excitement, her lips slightly parted. She turned to Arthas, those lips curving in a smile. "Aren't I lucky to be studying here?" "Sure," he said, smiling on her behalf. She was drinking this in like one who had been given water after a week in the desert, but he felt...unwanted. He clearly did not have the affinity for wielding magic as she did. "I'm told that outsiders aren't usually welcome," she said. "I think that's a shame. It would be nice to see you again." She blushed, and for a moment, Arthas forgot about the intimidation the city emanated, and heartily agreed that it would be nice to see Lady Jaina Proudmoore again, too. Very nice indeed.
 
"Again, ye little gnome girl! I'll pull yer pigtails, ye-Ooof!" The shield caught the taunting dwarf full in the helmed face, and he actually stumbled back a step or two. Arthas slashed with the sword, grinning beneath his own helm as it connected solidly. Then suddenly, he was sailing through the air to land hard on his back. His vision was filled with the image of a looming head with a long beard, and he was barely able to lift his blade in time to parry. With a grunt, he pulled his legs in to his chest and then extended them hard, catching Muradin in the gut. This time it was the dwarf
who went hurtling backward. Arthas brought his legs down swiftly and leaped up in a single smooth motion, charging his teacher who was still on the ground, coming at him with blow after blow until Muradin spoke the words that Arthas honestly never thought he'd hear: "I yield!" It took everything Arthas had to halt the strike, pulling up and back so abruptly he lost his balance and stumbled. Muradin lay where he was, his chest rising and falling. Fear squeezed Arthas's heart. "Muradin? Muradin!" A hearty chuckle escaped from the thick, bronze beard. "Well done, lad, well done indeed!" He struggled to sit up and Arthas was there, reaching out a hand to help haul the dwarf to his feet. Muradin pumped the hand happily. "So, ye were payin' attention after all when I taught ye my special trick." Relieved and pleased with the praise, Arthas grinned. Some of what Muradin taught him would be repeated, honed, and reinforced in his paladin training. But other things-well, he didn't think Uther the Lightbringer would know about feet planted firmly in the belly, or the rather handy trick regarding the efficacy of a broken wine bottle. There was fighting and there was fighting, and Muradin Bronzebeard seemed determined that Arthas Menethil would understand all aspects of it. Arthas was fourteen now, and had been training with Muradin several times a week, save for when the dwarf was away on diplomatic errands. At first, it had gone as both parties had expected-badly. Arthas left the first dozen or so sessions bruised, bloodied, and limping. He had stubbornly refused any offers of healing, insisting that the pain was part of the process. Muradin had approved, and he had shown it by pressing Arthas all the harder. Arthas never complained, not even when he wanted to, not even when Muradin scolded him or pressed the attack long after Arthas was too exhausted to even hold up a shield. And for that stubborn refusal to whine or to quit, he was rewarded twofold: he learned and learned well, and he won the respect of Muradin Bronzebeard. "Oh yes, sir, I was paying attention." Arthas chuckled. "Good lad, good lad." Muradin reached up to clap him on the shoulder. "Now, off wi' ye. Ye've taken quite the beating today; ye deserve a bit o' rest." His eyes twinkled as he spoke and Arthas nodded as if agreeing. Today, it
was Muradin who had taken the beating. And he seemed as happy as Arthas at the fact. The prince's heart suddenly swelled with affection toward the dwarf. Though a strict taskmaster, Muradin was someone of whom Arthas had grown terribly fond. He whistled a little as he strode toward his quarters, but then a sudden outburst froze him in his tracks. "No, Father! I will not!" "Calia, I grow tired of this conversation. You have no say in this matter." "Papa, please, no!" Arthas edged a little closer to Calia's chambers. The door was ajar and he listened, slightly worried. Terenas doted on Calia. What in the world was he asking of her to make her beg with him and use the term of endearment that both she and Arthas had dropped as they grew toward adulthood? Calia sobbed brokenly. Arthas could take it no longer. He opened the door. "I'm sorry, I couldn't help but overhear, but-what is wrong?" Terenas had recently seemed to be acting strangely, and now he looked furious with his sixteen-year-old daughter. "It is no business of yours, Arthas," Terenas rumbled. "I have told Calia something I wish her to do. She will obey me." Calia collapsed on the bed, sobbing. Arthas stared from his father to his sister in utter astonishment. Terenas muttered something and stormed out. Arthas glanced back at Calia, then followed his father. "Father, please, what's going on?" "Do not question me. Calia's duty is to obey her father." Terenas marched through a door and into a receiving room. Arthas recognized Lord Daval Prestor, a young noble whom Terenas seemed to hold in very high regard, and a pair of visiting Dalaran wizards he did not know. "Run along back to your sister, Arthas, and try to calm her. I'll be with you as soon as I can, I promise." With a final glance at the three visitors, Arthas nodded and went back to Calia's rooms. His older sister had not moved, although her sobs had quieted somewhat. At a total loss, Arthas simply sat beside her on the bed, feeling awkward. Calia sat up on the bed, her face wet. "I'm sorry you h-had to see that, Arthas, but m-maybe it's for the best." "What did Father want you to do?" "He wishes me to marry against my will."
Arthas blinked. "Calie, you're only sixteen, you're not even old enough to get married." She reached for a handkerchief and dabbed at her swollen eyes. "That's what I said. But Father said it didn't matter; we'd formalize the betrothal and on my birthday I'd marry Lord Prestor." Arthas's sea-green eyes widened in comprehension. So that was why Prestor was here.... "Well," he began awkwardly, "he's very well connected, and-I guess he's handsome. Everyone says so. At least he's not some old man." "You don't understand, Arthas. I don't care how well connected or handsome or even kind he is. It's that I don't have any choice in the matter. I'm-I'm like your horse. I'm a thing, not a person. To be given away as Father sees fit-to seal a political bargain." "You-you don't love Prestor?" "Love him?" Her blue, bloodshot eyes narrowed in anger. "I barely know him! He's never taken the slightest...oh, what's the use? I know that this is common practice among royalty and nobility. That we are pawns. But I just never expected Father-" Nor had Arthas. He'd honestly never given much thought to marriage for himself or his sister. He was much more interested in training with Muradin and riding Invincible. But Calia was right. It was common among the nobility to make good marriages to ensure their political status. He'd just never thought his father would sell his daughter like-like a broodmare. "Calie, I'm really sorry," he said, and meant it. "Is there someone else? Maybe you could convince Father that there's a better match-one that makes you happy as well." Calia shook her head bitterly. "It's no use. You heard him. He didn't ask me, didn't suggest Lord Prestor-he ordered me." She looked at him pleadingly. "Arthas, when you are king, promise me-promise me you won't do that to your children." Children? Arthas was in no way ready to think about that. There weren't even any-well, there was, but he hadn't thought about her in- "And when you marry-Papa cannot order you as he orders me. Make sure you care for this girl and-and that she cares for you. Or is at least asked about whom she wants to share her life and her b-bed with." She started to weep afresh, but Arthas was too shaken by the revelation
that burst upon him. He was only fourteen now, but in four short years, he'd be of age to wed. He suddenly recalled snatches of conversation he'd heard here and there about the future of the Menethil line. His wife would be the mother of kings. He'd have to choose carefully, but also, as Calia had asked, kindly. His parents obviously cared greatly for each other. It was reflected in their smiles and gestures, despite many years of marriage. Arthas wanted that. He wanted a companion, a friend, a- He frowned. But what if he couldn't have that? "I'm sorry, Calie, but maybe you're the lucky one. It might be worse to have the freedom to choose, and know that you couldn't have what you wanted." "I would trade that for being a-a piece of meat in a heartbeat." "We each have our duties, I guess," Arthas said quietly, somberly. "You to marry whomever Father wants, and me to marry well for the kingdom." He rose abruptly. "I'm sorry, Calie." "Arthas-where are you going?" He didn't answer, but practically raced through the palace to the stables and, without waiting for a groom, quickly saddled Invincible himself. Arthas knew it was only a temporary solution, but he was fourteen, and a temporary solution was still a solution. He bent low over Invincible's back, the white mane whipping his face as the horse galloped, all sleekly coiled muscle and grace. Arthas's face stretched in a grin. He was never happier than when he rode like this, the two of them merging into one glorious whole. He had waited, his patience sorely tested, for so long to be able to ride the animal he had watched coming into the world, but it had been worth it. They were the perfect team. Invincible wanted nothing from him, asked nothing of him, only seemed to wish to be allowed to escape the confines of the stables as Arthas longed to escape the confines of his royalty. They did so together. They were coming up on the jump Arthas loved now. To the east of Capital City and close to the Balnir farmstead was a small cluster of hills. Invincible surged, the earth devoured by his pounding hooves, pulling himself upward toward the precipice almost as fast as if they were on level ground. He wheeled and turned along the narrow pathways, sending stones scattering with his hooves, his heart and Arthas's both racing in excitement. Then Arthas guided the stallion to the left, over an embankment-a shortcut to the Balnir property. Invincible did not hesitate, had not hesitated even the first time that Arthas had asked him to leap. He gathered himself and
launched forward, and for a glorious, heart-stopping moment, horse and rider were airborne. Then they landed securely on soft, springy grass, and were off again. Invincible.
CHAPTER FOUR
"As you can see, Your Highness," said Lieutenant General Aedelas Blackmoore, "the taxes have been put to good use. Every precaution has been taken in the operation of this facility. In fact, security is so tight we've been able to stage gladiatorial combat here." "So I've heard," said Arthas, as he walked with the commander of the internment camps on a tour of the grounds. Durnholde, not an internment camp itself, but the nerve center of all of the others, was huge, and indeed had almost a festival air about it. It was a crisp but bright autumn day, and the breeze caused the blue and white banners that flew over the keep to snap energetically. The wind stirred Blackmoore's long raven hair and tugged at Arthas's cloak as they strolled along the ramparts. "And so you shall also see," Blackmoore promised, giving his prince an ingratiating grin. It had been Arthas's idea for a surprise inspection. Terenas had praised Arthas for his initiative and compassion. "It's only right, Father," Arthas had said, and by and large he meant it, although his primary reason for the suggestion was to satisfy his curiosity about the pet orc the lieutenant general kept. "We should make sure the money is going into the camps and not Blackmoore's pocket. We can ascertain if he is taking proper care of the gladiatorial participants-and also, make sure he is not walking the path of his father." Blackmoore's father, General Aedelyn Blackmoore, had been a notorious traitor, tried and convicted of selling state secrets. While his crimes had taken place long ago, when his son had been but a child, the stain had dogged Aedelas throughout his military career. It was only his record of victory in battles, and particular ferocity in fighting the orcs, that had enabled the current Blackmoore to rise in the ranks. Still, Arthas could detect the smell of liquor on the man's breath, even at this hour of the morning. He suspected that particular piece of information would not be news to Terenas, but he'd make sure he told his father anyway.
Arthas looked down, feigning interest in watching the dozens of guards who stood at rigid attention. He wondered if they were that attentive when their future king wasn't watching them. "I look forward to the bout today," he said. "Will I be able to watch your Thrall in action? I've heard quite a bit about him." Blackmoore grinned, his neatly trimmed goatee parting to reveal white teeth. "He was not scheduled to fight today, but for you, Your Highness, I shall pair him up against the worthiest foes available." Two hours later, the tour was complete, and Arthas shared a delicious meal with Blackmoore and a younger man named Lord Karramyn Langston, whom Blackmoore introduced as "my protégé." Arthas took an instinctive dislike to Langston, noting the man's soft hands and languid demeanor. At least Blackmoore had fought in battle for his title; this boy-Arthas thought of him as a boy, although in truth Langston was older than Arthas's seventeen years-had been handed everything on a platter. Well, so have I, he thought, but he also knew what sacrifices a king would be expected to make. Langston looked like he'd never denied himself a thing in his life. Nor did he deny himself now, helping himself to the choicest cuts of meat, the most lavish pastries, and more than one glass of wine to wash it down with. Blackmoore, in contrast, ate sparingly, though he had more alcohol than Langston. Arthas's dislike of the pair was completed when their serving girl entered and Blackmoore reached to touch her in a proprietary manner. The girl, golden-haired and simply clad, with a face that needed no artifice to be beautiful, smiled as if she enjoyed it, but Arthas caught a quick flash of unhappiness in her blue eyes. "This is Taretha Foxton," Blackmoore said, one hand still caressing the girl's arm as she gathered the plates. "Daughter of my personal servant, Tammis, whom I'm sure you'll see later." Arthas gave the girl his most winning smile. She reminded him a bit of Jaina-her hair brightened by the sun, her skin tanned. She returned the smile fleetingly, then demurely looked away as she gathered the plates, dropping a quick curtsey before leaving. "You'll have one like that soon enough, lad," Blackmoore said, laughing. It took Arthas a second to grasp the meaning and then he blinked, startled. The two men laughed harder, and Blackmoore raised his goblet in a toast. "To fair-haired girls," he said, in a purring voice. Arthas looked back at
Taretha, thought of Jaina, and forced himself to raise his glass.
 
An hour later Arthas had forgotten all about Taretha Foxton and his indignation on her behalf. His voice was raw from screaming, his hands hurt from clapping, and he was having the time of his life. At first, he'd felt a little uncomfortable. The first few combatants in the ring were simple beasts pitted against one another, fighting to the death for no reason other than the enjoyment of the onlookers. "How are they treated prior to this?" Arthas had asked. He was fond of animals; it unsettled him to see them used so. Langston had opened his mouth, but Blackmoore shushed him with a quick gesture. He had smiled, leaning back in his chaise lounge and snagging a bunch of grapes. "Well of course we want them at their fighting peak," he said. "So they are captured and treated quite well. And as you can see, the bouts go quickly. If an animal survives and is not able to continue fighting again, we put him down at once, mercifully." Arthas hoped the man was not lying to him. A sick feeling in his gut told him Blackmoore probably was, but he ignored it. The feeling vanished when the fighting involved men against the beasts. As he watched, riveted, Blackmoore said, "The men are paid well. They in fact become minor celebrities." Not the orc, though. And Arthas knew it, and approved. That's what he was waiting for-the chance to see Blackmoore's pet orc, found as an infant and raised to be a fighter in these rings, in combat. He was not disappointed. Apparently, everything up until now had been a warm-up for the crowd. When the doors creaked open and a huge green shape strode forward, everyone stood, roaring. Somehow Arthas found himself among them. Thrall was enormous, appearing even larger because he was obviously so much healthier and alert than the other specimens Arthas had seen in the camps. He wore little armor and no helm, and green skin stretched tightly over powerful muscle. Too, he stood straighter than others. The cheering was deafening, and Thrall walked a circle around the ring, lifting his fists, turning his ugly face up to be showered with rose petals usually reserved for holidays. "I taught him to do that," Blackmoore said with pride. "It's an odd thing,
really. The crowd cheers for him, yet they come hoping every time he'll get beaten." "Has he ever lost a bout?" "Never, Your Highness. Nor will he. Yet people keep hoping, and the money keeps flowing." Arthas eyed him. "As long as the royal coffers see their proper percentage of your earnings, Lieutenant General, you'll be permitted to continue the games." He turned again to the orc, watching him as he completed his circuit. "He...is completely under control, isn't he?" "Absolutely," Blackmoore said immediately. "He was raised by humans and taught to fear and respect us." As if he had heard the comment, though he could not possibly have done so over the thundering cries of the crowd, Thrall turned to where Arthas, Blackmoore, and Langston sat watching. He thumped his chest in a salute and then bowed deeply. "You see? Utterly my creature," Blackmoore purred. He rose and lifted a flag, waving it, and across the ring a solidly built red-haired man waved another flag. Thrall turned toward the door, gripping the massive battle axe that was his weapon in this bout. The guards began to raise the door, and before it had even opened fully, a bear the size of Invincible surged forward. Its hackles had risen and it barreled straight for Thrall as if it had been launched from a cannon, its snarl audible even over the roar of the crowd. Thrall held his ground, stepping aside at the absolute last minute and bringing the huge axe around as if it weighed nothing at all. It tore a great rent in the bear's side, and the animal roared in maddened pain, whirling and sending blood spattering. Again, the orc stood his ground, resting on the balls of his bare feet until he moved with a speed that belied his size. He met the bear head-on, shouting taunts in a guttural voice in perfect Common, and brought the axe crunching down. The bear's head was nearly severed from its neck, but it kept running for a few moments before toppling into a quivering heap. Thrall threw back his head and cried out his victory. The crowd went mad. Arthas stared. There wasn't a scratch on the orc, and as far as Arthas could tell, the brute wasn't even particularly winded. "That's just the opener," Blackmoore said, smiling at Arthas's reaction.
"Next will be three humans attacking him. He's also hampered by the fact that he's not to kill them, just defeat them. More a strategic battle than one of brute force, but I confess, there's something about watching him decapitate a bear in a single blow that always makes me proud." Three human gladiators, all large, powerfully muscled men, entered the arena and saluted their opponent and the crowd. Arthas watched as Thrall sized them up and wondered just how smart it was of Blackmoore to make his pet orc so damn good at fighting. If Thrall ever escaped, he could teach those skills to other orcs. It was possible, despite the increased security. After all, if Orgrim Doomhammer could escape from the Undercity, in the very heart of the palace, Thrall could escape from Durnholde.
 
The state visit lasted five days. During one of those days, late in the evening, Taretha Foxton came to visit the prince in his private quarters. He was puzzled that his servants did not answer the tentative knock on the door and was even more startled to see the pretty blond girl standing there carrying a tray of delicacies. Her eyes were downcast, but her dress was revealing enough that he didn't speak immediately. She dropped a curtsey. "My lord Blackmoore sent me with this offering of things to tempt you," she said. Color suffused her cheeks. Arthas was confused. "I-tell your master thank you, although I am not hungry. And I'm wondering what he's done with my servants." "They have been invited to a repast with the other servants," Taretha explained. She still didn't look up. "I see. Well, that's kind of the lieutenant general; I'm sure the men appreciate it." She didn't move. "Is there anything else, Taretha?" The pink in her cheeks deepened, and she lifted her eyes to him. They were calm, resigned. "My lord Blackmoore sent me with this offering of things to tempt you," she repeated. "Things you might enjoy." Understanding burst upon him then. Understanding, and embarrassment, and irritation, and anger. He composed himself with an effort-it was hardly the girl's fault, indeed, she was the one being ill used.
"Taretha," he said, "I'll take the food, with thanks. I need nothing else." "Your Highness, I'm afraid he will insist." "Tell him I said it's fine." "Sir, you don't understand. If I come back he-" He glanced down at the hands holding the tray, at the long hair draped just so. Arthas stepped forward and lifted her trailing hair out of the way, frowning at the brownish-blue fading marks on her wrists and throat. "I see," he said. "Come inside, then." Once she had entered, he closed the door and turned to her. "Stay for as long as you feel comfortable, then go back to him. In the meantime, I can't possibly eat all this." He gestured for her to sit and took a chair opposite her, snagging a small pastry and grinning. Taretha blinked at him. It took a moment for her to understand what he was saying, and then cautious relief and gratitude spread over her face as she poured the wine. After a little while, she began to respond to his questions with more than a few polite words, and they spent the next few hours talking before they agreed it was time for her to return. As she picked up the tray, she turned to him. "Your Highness-it pleases me so much to know that the man who will be our next king has such a kind heart. The lady you choose to make your queen will be a very lucky woman." He smiled and closed the door behind her, leaning on it for a moment. The lady he would choose to make his queen. He recalled his conversation with Calia; fortunately for his sister, Terenas had started to have some suspicions about Prestor-nothing that could be proven, but enough for second thoughts. Arthas was almost of age-a year older than Calia had been when their father had nearly betrothed her to Prestor. He supposed he'd have to start thinking about finding a queen sooner or later. Tomorrow he would be leaving, and not a minute too soon.
 
The winter chill was in the air. Autumn's last glorious days were gone, and the trees, once shades of gold and red and orange, were now bare skeletons against a gray sky. In a few more months, Arthas would reach his nineteenth year and be inducted into the Order of the Silver Hand, and he was more than ready. His training with Muradin had ended a few months ago, and he had
now begun sparring with Uther. It was different, but similar. What Muradin had taught was attentiveness and a willingness to win the battle no matter what. The paladins had a more ritualistic way of looking at battle, and focused more on the attitude one brought into the fight than the actual mechanics of swordplay. Arthas found both methods valid, although he was beginning to wonder if he'd ever have the chance to use what he had learned in a true battle. Normally, he'd be in prayer session now, but his father was off on a diplomatic visit to Stromgarde, and Uther had accompanied him. Which meant that now Arthas had afternoons free for a few days, and he was not about to waste them, even if the weather was less than perfect. He clung easily and familiarly to Invincible as they galloped over the glade, the animal's stride only slightly slowed by a few inches of snow on the ground. He could see his breath and that of the great white horse as Invincible tossed his head and snorted. It was starting to snow again now, not the soft fat flakes that drifted lazily down but small, hard crystals that stung. Arthas frowned and pressed on. A little farther, then he would turn back, he told himself. He might even stop at the Balnir farm. It had been a while since he had been there; Jorum and Jarim would likely be interested to see the magnificent horse that the gawky little colt had grown into. The impulse, having struck, now demanded to be obeyed, and Arthas turned Invincible with a subtle pressure from his left leg. The horse wheeled, obedient and completely in tune with his master's desires. The snow was picking up, tiny needles digging into his exposed skin, and Arthas pulled the cape up over his head for a little more protection. Invincible shook his head, his skin twitching as it did when he was being annoyed by insects in the summer. He galloped down the path, stretching his neck forward, enjoying the exertion every bit as much as Arthas. They were coming up on the jump soon, and shortly after that, a warm stable for the steed and a hot mug of tea for his rider before they headed back to the palace. Arthas's face was starting to become numb with the cold, and his hands in their fine leather gloves weren't much better. He tightened his chilled hands over the reins, forcing his fingers to bend, and gathered himself as Invincible leaped-no, he reminded himself, flew, they flew over this jump like- -except they didn't fly. At the last minute, Arthas felt the hideous
sensation of Invincible's rear hooves slipping on the icy stone, and the horse flailed, neighing, his legs frantically trying to get a secure footing on thin air. Arthas's throat was suddenly raw, and he realized he was screaming as jagged stone, not smooth snow-encrusted grass, rushed up to meet them with lethal speed. He pulled hard on the reins, as if that could do something, as if anything could do something- The sound cut through his stupor, and he blinked his way back to consciousness with the bone-chilling shriek of a beast in agony clawing at his brain. He couldn't move at first, though his body spasmed of its own accord, trying to move toward the awful cries. Finally he was able to sit up. Pain shot through him and he added his own gasp of agony to the hideous cacophony, and he realized he'd probably broken at least one rib, probably more. The snow had picked up and was coming down hard and heavy now. He could barely see three feet in front of him. He shut out the pain, craning his neck, trying to find- Invincible. His eye was drawn to movement and the widening pool of crimson that melted the snow, that steamed in the cold. "No," Arthas whispered, and struggled to his feet. The world went black around the edges and he almost lost consciousness again, but through sheer will hung on. Slowly, he made his way to the panicked animal, struggling against the pain and the driving wind and snow that threatened to knock him over. Invincible was churning up the bloodied snow with two powerful, unharmed rear legs and two shattered forelegs. Arthas felt his stomach heave at the sight of the limbs, once so long and straight and clean and powerful, hanging at odd angles as Invincible kept trying and failing to stand. Then the image was mercifully blurred by the snow and the rush of hot tears that spilled down his cheeks. He slogged toward his horse, sobbing, dropping to his knees beside the maddened animal and trying to do-what? This was no scratch, to be quickly bound so that Invincible could be led to a warm stable and hot mash. Arthas reached for the animal's head, wanting to touch him, to calm him somehow, but Invincible was manic with agony. And he kept screaming. Help. There were priests and Sir Uther-maybe they could heal- Pain greater than physical shot through the youth. The bishop had gone with his father to Stromgarde, as had Uther. There might be a priest in another village, but Arthas didn't know where, and with the storm-
He shrank back from the animal, covering his ears and closing his eyes, sobbing so that his whole body shook. With the storm, he could never find a healer before Invincible either died of his injuries or froze to death. Arthas wasn't even sure he could find the Balnir homestead, even though it could not be far. The world was white, everywhere save where the dying horse, who had trusted him enough to leap off an icy embankment, lay churning up a steaming crimson pool. Arthas knew what he had to do, and he couldn't do it. He would never know how long he sat there, weeping, trying to shut out the sight and sound of his beloved horse in agony, until finally Invincible's struggles slowed. He lay in the snow, his sides heaving, his eyes rolling in torment. Arthas couldn't feel his face or limbs, but somehow he managed to move toward the beast. Every breath was agony, and he welcomed the pain. This was his fault. His fault. He took the great head in his lap, and for a brief, merciful moment he wasn't sitting in the snow with a wounded beast, but sitting in a stable while a broodmare gave birth. For that moment, everything was all just beginning, and not coming to this shocking, sickening, avoidable end. His tears fell on the horse's broad cheek. Invincible trembled, his brown eyes wide with now-silent pain. Arthas removed his gloves and ran his hand along the pink-gray muzzle, feeling the warmth of Invincible's breath against his hands. Then, slowly, he eased the horse's head from his lap, got to his feet, and fumbled with his warmed hand for his sword. His feet sank in the red puddle of melted snow as he stood over the fallen animal. "I'm sorry," he said. "I'm so sorry." Invincible regarded him calmly, trustingly, as if he somehow understood what was about to happen, and the need for it. It was more than Arthas could bear, and for a moment tears again clouded his vision. He blinked them back hard. Arthas lifted the sword and brought it straight down. He did this right, at least; pierced Invincible's great heart with a single strong blow from arms that should have been too chilled to do so. He felt the sword pierce skin, flesh, scrape against bone, and impale itself into the earth below. Invincible arched once, then shuddered and lay still. Jorum and Jarim found him there some time later, after the snow had tapered off, curled up tightly against the cooling corpse of a once-glorious
animal brimming with life and energy. As the elder man bent to pick him up, Arthas cried out with pain. "Sorry, lad," Jorum said, his voice almost unbearably kind. "For hurting you, and for the accident." "Yes," Arthas said weakly, "the accident. He lost his footing..." "And no wonder in this weather. That storm came on quickly. You're lucky you're alive. Come on-we'll get you inside and send someone to the palace." As he shifted in the farmer's strong grip, Arthas said, "Bury him...here? So I can come visit?" Balnir exchanged glances with his son, then nodded. "Aye, of course. He was a noble steed." Arthas craned his neck to look at the body of the horse he had named Invincible. He would let them all think it was an accident, because he could not bear to tell anyone what he had done. And he made a vow then and there that if anyone else ever needed protection-that if sacrifices had to be made for the welfare of others-he would do it. Whatever it takes, he thought.
CHAPTER FIVE
Summer was in full blaze, and the merciless sun beat down on His Royal Highness Prince Arthas Menethil as he rode through the streets of Stormwind. He was in a foul mood, despite the fact that this was a day that he was supposed to have been looking forward to all his life. The sun glinted off the full plate armor he wore, and Arthas thought he'd bake to death before he reached the cathedral. Sitting atop his new charger only served to remind him that the horse, while powerful, well-trained, and well-bred, was not Invincible, gone for only a few months and bitterly missed. And he found that his mind had suddenly gone blank regarding what he was supposed to do once the ceremony began. Beside him rode his father, who seemed completely unaware of his son's irritation. "This has been a day long in coming, my son," Terenas said, turning to smile at Arthas. Despite the heat and the weight of the helm he wore, Arthas was glad of it; it concealed his face, and he wasn't sure he could fake a convincing smile right now. "Indeed it has, Father," he replied, keeping his voice calm. It was one of the biggest celebrations Stormwind had ever seen. In addition to Terenas, many other kings, nobility, and famous personages were in attendance, riding like a parade through the city's white cobbled streets to the massive Cathedral of Light, damaged during the First War but now restored and even more glorious than before. Arthas's boyhood friend Varian, king of Stormwind, was now married and a new father. He had opened the palace to all the visiting royalty and their retinues. Sitting with Varian last night, drinking mead and talking, had been the highlight of the trip for Arthas so far. The hurting, traumatized youth of a decade ago had grown into a confident, handsome, centered king. Somewhere along about early morning, after midnight and before dawn, they had gone to the armory, fetched wooden training swords, and gone at each other for a long time, laughing and recounting memories, their prowess only a little the worse for the alcohol they'd consumed. Varian, trained since early
childhood, had always been good and now he was better. But so was Arthas, and he gave as good as he got. But now it was all formality, incredibly hot armor, and a nagging sense that he didn't deserve the honor that was about to be bestowed upon him. In a rare moment, Arthas had spoken of his feelings to Uther. The intimidating paladin, who, since Arthas was old enough to remember, had been the very image of rock-solid steadfastness to the Light, had startled the prince with his reply. "Lad, no one feels ready. No one feels he deserves it. And you know why? Because no one does. It's grace, pure and simple. We are inherently unworthy, simply because we're human, and all human beings-aye, and elves, and dwarves, and all the other races-are flawed. But the Light loves us anyway. It loves us for what we sometimes can rise to in rare moments. It loves us for what we can do to help others. And it loves us because we can help it share its message by striving daily to be worthy, even though we understand that we can't ever truly become so." He'd clapped a hand on Arthas's shoulder, giving him a rare, simple smile. "So stand there today, as I did, feeling that you can't possibly deserve it or ever be worthy, and know that you're in the same place every single paladin has ever stood." It comforted Arthas a little. He squared his shoulders, tilted the visor back, and smiled and waved to the crowd that was cheering so happily on this hot summer day. Rose petals were showered upon him, and from somewhere trumpets blared. They had reached the cathedral. Arthas dismounted and a groom led away his charger. Another servant stepped up to take the helm he tugged off. His blond hair was damp with sweat, and he quickly ran a gauntleted hand over it. Arthas had never been to Stormwind before, and he was impressed by the combination of serenity and power the cathedral radiated. Slowly, he moved up the carpeted carved stairs, grateful for the sudden coolness of the building's stone interior. The fragrance of the incense was calming and familiar; it was the same as that which his family burned in their small chapel. There was no giddy throng here now, just silent, respectful rows of prominent personages and clergy. Arthas recognized several faces: Genn Greymane, Thoras Trollbane, Admiral Daelin Proudmoore- Arthas blinked, then his lips curved into a smile. Jaina! She had certainly
grown up in the years since he had last seen her. Not quite a drop-dead beauty, but pretty, the liveliness and intelligence he'd responded to as a boy still radiating from her like a beacon. She caught Arthas's look and smiled a little in return, inclining her head in respect. Arthas returned his attention to the altar he approached, but felt a little bit of the trepidation leave his heart. He hoped there would be a chance for him to talk to her after all the formalities were taken care of. Archbishop Alonsus Faol awaited him at the altar. The archbishop reminded Arthas more of Greatfather Winter than of any of the rulers he had hitherto met. Short and stout, with a long flowing snow-white beard and bright eyes, even in the midst of solemn ceremony Faol radiated warmth and kindliness. Faol waited until Arthas approached him and knelt before him respectfully before opening a large book and speaking. "In the Light, we gather to empower our brother. In its grace, he will be made anew. In its power, he shall educate the masses. In its strength, he shall combat the shadow. And in its wisdom, he shall lead his brethren to the eternal rewards of paradise." On his left, several men-and a few women, Arthas noticed-dressed in flowing white robes stood still and poised. Some held censors, which swayed almost hypnotically. Others bore large candles. One carried an embroidered blue stole. Arthas had been introduced to many of them earlier, but found that their names had gone right out of his head. That was unusual for him-he was genuinely interested in those who worked for him and served under him, and made an effort to get to know all their names. Archbishop Faol asked the clerics to bestow their blessings upon Arthas. They did, the one who bore the blue stole coming forward to drape it about the prince's neck and anointing his brow with holy oil. "By the grace of the Light, may your brethren be healed," the cleric said. Faol turned to the men on Arthas's right. "Knights of the Silver Hand, if you deem this man worthy, place your blessings upon him." In contrast to the first group, these men, standing at attention in heavy, gleaming plate armor, were all known to Arthas. They were the original paladins of the Silver Hand, and it was the first time they had assembled since their induction many years past. Uther, of course; Tirion Fordring, aging but still powerful and graceful, now governor of Hearthglen; the sixand-a-half-foot Saidan Dathrohan, and the pious, bushy-bearded Gavinrad. One was missing from their number-Turalyon, right hand to Anduin Lothar
in the Second War, who was lost with the company that had ventured through the Dark Portal when Arthas was twelve. Gavinrad stepped forth, holding an enormous, heavy-looking hammer, its silver head etched with runes and its sturdy haft wrapped in blue leather. He placed the hammer in front of Arthas, then stepped back to stand with his brethren. It was Uther the Lightbringer himself, Arthas's mentor in the order, who next came forward. In his hands he carried a pair of ceremonial shoulder plates. Uther was the most controlled man Arthas had ever known, and yet his eyes were bright with unshed tears as he placed the armor on Arthas's broad shoulders. He spoke in a voice that was both powerful and trembling with emotion. "By the strength of the Light, may your enemies be undone." His hand lingered a moment on Arthas's shoulder, then he, too, retreated. Archbishop Faol smiled at the prince kindly. Arthas met the gaze evenly, no longer worried. He remembered everything now. "Arise and be recognized," Faol bade him. Arthas did so. "Do you, Arthas Menethil, vow to uphold the honor and codes of the Order of the Silver Hand?" Arthas blinked, momentarily surprised at the lack of his title. Of course, he reasoned, I'm being inducted as a man, not a prince. "I do." "Do you vow to walk in the grace of the Light and spread its wisdom to your fellow man?" "I do." "Do you vow to vanquish evil wherever it be found, and protect the innocent with your very life?" "I d-by my blood and honor, I do." That was close, he'd almost messed up. Faol gave him a quick wink of reassurance, then turned to address both the clerics and the paladins. "Brothers and sisters-you who have gathered here to bear witness-raise your hands and let the Light illuminate this man." The clerics and paladins all lifted right hands, which were now suffused by a soft, golden glow. They pointed at Arthas, directing the radiance toward him. Arthas's eyes were wide with wonder, and he waited for the glorious glow to envelop him. Nothing happened. The moment stretched on. Sweat broke out on Arthas's brow. What was going wrong? Why wasn't
the Light wrapping itself around him in blessing and benediction? And then the sunlight streaming in through windows in the ceiling slowly began to move toward the prince standing alone in shining armor, and Arthas exhaled in relief. This had to be what Uther had spoken of. The feeling of unworthiness that Uther assured him all paladins felt simply seemed to drag out the moment. The words Uther had spoken came back to him: No one feels he deserves it...its grace, pure and simple...but the Light loves us anyway. Now it shone down on him, in him, through him, and he was forced to shut his eyes against the almost blinding radiance. It warmed at first, then seared, and he winced slightly. He felt-scoured. Emptied, scrubbed clean, then filled again, and he felt the Light swell inside him and then fade away to a tolerable level. He blinked and reached for the hammer, the symbol of the order. As his hand closed about the haft, he looked up at Archbishop Faol, whose benign smile widened. "Arise, Arthas Menethil, paladin defender of Lordaeron. Welcome to the Order of the Silver Hand." Arthas couldn't help it. He grinned as he grasped the enormous hammer, so large that for a brief moment he thought he wouldn't be able to lift it, and swung it upward with a whoop. The Light, he realized, made the hammer seem to weigh less in his hands. At his exultant cry, the cathedral suddenly began to ring with the sound of answering cheers and applause. Arthas found himself roughly embraced by his new brothers and sisters, and then all remnants of formality were torn away as his father, Varian, and others crowded the altar area. Much laughter was had as Varian tried to clap him on the shoulder, only to have his hand sting when he struck the hard metal of the shoulder plates. And then somehow Arthas was turned around and stared into the blue-eyed, smiling face of Lady Jaina Proudmoore. They were mere inches apart, jostled and pressed together by the throng that had somehow sprung up around the newest member of the Order of the Silver Hand, and Arthas wasn't about to let the unique opportunity slip away. Almost at once his left arm slipped around her trim waist and he pulled her to him. She looked startled, but not displeased, as he hugged her. She returned the hug, laughing against his chest for a moment, then pulling back, still smiling. For a moment, the happy sounds of a celebrating crowd on a hot summer afternoon went away, and all Arthas could see was this suntanned, smiling girl. Could he kiss her? Should he kiss her? He certainly wanted to. But even
as he debated she disentangled herself and stepped back, and her fair-haired girlish form was replaced by another fair-haired, girlish form. Calia laughed and hugged her brother tightly. "We're all so proud of you, Arthas," she exclaimed. He grinned and returned the embrace, happy to hear his sister's approval, sorry that he'd not gone ahead and kissed the admiral's daughter. "You will make a wonderful paladin, I'm sure of it." "Well done, my son," Terenas said. "I am a proud father today." Arthas's eyes narrowed. Today? What was meant by that? Was his father not proud of him on other days? He was suddenly angry, and not certain why or with whom. The Light, delaying its approval; Jaina backing away from him right at the moment when he could have kissed her; Terenas and his comment. He forced a smile and began to shoulder his way through the crowd. He'd had enough of this press of people, few of whom really knew him, none of whom understood. Arthas was nineteen. At the same age, Varian had been king for a full year. He was of an age to do whatever he wanted to, and now had the blessing of the Silver Hand to guide him. He didn't want to simply linger at the palace of Lordaeron, or do boring state visits. He wanted to do something...fun. Something that his power, his position, his abilities would earn him. And he knew exactly what he wanted that something to be.
PART TWO
THE BRIGHT LADY
INTERLUDE
It was exactly the sort of day Jaina Proudmoore didn't like-sullen, stormy, and bitterly cold. While the ocean breezes always made Theramore feel cool, even in the hot summer months, the chill of the wind and rain that now pummeled the city cut to the bone. The ocean churned unhappily, the sky above it gray and menacing. It showed no signs of letting up. Outside, training fields turned to mud, travelers sought the shelter of the inn, and Dr. VanHowzen would need to watch the injured in his care for signs of illness brought on by the sudden cold and wetness. Jaina's guards stood in the downpour without complaint. No doubt they were miserable. Jaina ordered one of her attendants to take the pot of tea she had just brewed for her and her chancellor down to the stalwart guards enduring their duty. She could wait for a second pot to be ready. Thunder rumbled and there was a flash of lightning. Jaina, snug in her tower surrounded by the books and papers she so loved, shivered and drew her cloak about her more closely, then turned to one who was doubtless even more uncomfortable than she. Magna Aegwynn, former Guardian of Tirisfal, mother to the great Magus Medivh, once the most powerful woman in the world, sat in a chair drawn close to the fire, sipping a cup of tea. Her gnarled hands closed about the cup, seeking its warmth. Her long hair, white as freshly fallen snow, was loose about her shoulders. She looked up as Jaina approached and sat in the chair across from her. Her green eyes, a deep, knowing emerald, missed nothing. "You're thinking about him." Jaina scowled and looked into the fire, trying to distract herself with the dancing flames. "I didn't know being a Guardian meant you could read minds." "Minds? Pfft. It's your face and bearing I can read like a primer, child. That furrow in your brow crinkles just so when it's he who occupies your mind. Besides, you always get in this mood when the weather turns." Jaina shivered. "Am I truly so easy to read?"
Aegwynn's sharp features softened and she patted Jaina's hand. "Well, I've got a thousand years of observation under my belt. I'm a bit better at reading people than most." Jaina sighed. "It's true. When the weather is cold, I do think of him. About what happened. About whether I could have done anything." Aegwynn sighed. "A thousand years and I don't think I've ever really been in love. Too much else to worry about. But if it's any consolation to you -he's been on my mind, too." Jaina blinked, surprised and unsettled by the comment. "You've been thinking about Arthas?" The former Guardian regarded her keenly. "The Lich King. He's not Arthas, not anymore." "I don't need to be reminded of that," Jaina said, a touch too sharply. "Why do you-" "Can't you feel it?" Slowly, Jaina nodded. She had tried to chalk it up to the weather and the tensions that always ran high when it was so damp and unpleasant. But Aegwynn was suggesting that there was more to it than that, and Jaina Proudmoore, thirty years of age, ruler of Theramore Isle, knew the old woman was right. Old woman. A smile flickered on her lips as she thought about the words. She herself was well past her own youth, a youth in which Arthas Menethil had played so significant a role. "Tell me of him," Aegwynn said, sitting back in her chair. At that moment, one of the servants came with a fresh pot of tea and cookies hot from the oven. Jaina accepted a cup gratefully. "I've told you all I know." "No," Aegwynn retorted. "You told me the facts of what happened. I want you to tell me about him. Arthas Menethil. Because whatever's going on right now up in Northrend-and yes, I think something is going on-it's about Arthas, not the Lich King. Not yet at any rate. Besides," and the old woman grinned, the wrinkles that lined her face overshadowed by the impish, girlish glint in her emerald eyes, "it's a cold and rainy day. And that's exactly the sort of day stories were made for."
CHAPTER SIX
Jaina Proudmoore hummed a little as she strode through the gardens of Dalaran. She'd been here for eight years now, and the city never lost its sense of wonder. Everything here emanated magic, and to her it was almost like a scent, a fragrance of everything in bloom, and she inhaled it with a smile. Of course, some of that "fragrance" was that of actual flowers in bloom; the gardens of this place were as saturated with magic as everything else. She had never seen healthier, more colorful flowers, or eaten more delicious fruits and vegetables than here. And the knowledge! Jaina felt she had learned more in the last eight years than in her entire life-and most of that in the last two, since Archmage Antonidas had formally taken her as his apprentice. Few things contented her more than sitting curled up in the sun with a cold glass of sweet nectar and a pile of books. Of course, some of the rarer parchments needed to be protected from sunlight and spilled nectar, so the next best thing was sitting inside one of the many rooms, wearing gloves so her hands would not damage the fragile paper, carefully perusing something that was older almost than she could comprehend. But for now, she just wanted to wander in the gardens, feeling the living earth beneath her feet, smelling the incredible scents, and, when hunger gnawed at her stomach, reaching up and plucking a ripe goldenbark apple warm from the sunlight and crunching it happily. "In Quel'Thalas," came a smooth, cultured voice, "there are trees that tower over these in a glory of white bark and golden leaves, that all but sing in the evening breezes. I think you would enjoy seeing them someday." Jaina turned to offer Prince Kael'thas Sunstrider, son to Anasterian, king of the quel'dorei elves, a smile and a deep curtsey. "Your Highness," she said. "I wasn't aware you'd returned. A pleasure. And yes, I'm certain I would." Jaina was the daughter, if not of royalty, of nobility and of a ruler. Her father, Admiral Daelin Proudmoore, ruled the city-state of Kul Tiras, and Jaina had grown up accustomed to interaction with nobility. And yet, Prince
Kael'thas unnerved her. She wasn't quite sure what it was. He was handsome, certainly, with that grace and beauty that all elves possessed. Tall, with hair like spun gold that fell halfway down his back, he always looked to her like a figure out of legend rather than a real, living person. Even though he was currently clad in the simpler violet and gold robes of a mage of Dalaran and not the lavish robes he would wear to official occasions, he never seemed to lose his stiffness. Perhaps that was it-there was a sort of... antiquated formality about him. Too, he was much older than she, though he looked about her age. He was sharply intelligent and an extremely talented and powerful mage, and some of the students whispered that he was one of the Six, the secret membership of the highest ranking magi of Dalaran. So she supposed she wasn't that much of a country bumpkin to find him intimidating. He reached up and took an apple himself, biting into it. "There is a certain heartiness about food native to human lands that I have come to appreciate." He smiled conspiratorially. "Sometimes elven food, while certainly delicious and attractively presented, leaves one still hungry for something more substantial." Jaina smiled. Prince Kael'thas always tried so hard to put her at ease. She only wished it worked better. "Few things are nicer than an apple and a slice of Dalaran sharp," she agreed. The silence stretched between then, awkward despite the casualness of the setting and the warmth of the sun. "So, you are back for a while?" "Yes, my business in Silvermoon has concluded for the time being. So I should not need to depart again anytime soon." He looked at her as he took another bite of the apple, his handsome features schooled to be impassive. Still, Jaina knew he was waiting for her reaction. "We are all pleased at your return, Your Highness." He wagged a finger at her. "Ah, I've told you, I would prefer it if you would simply call me Kael." "I'm sorry, Kael." He looked at her and a hint of sorrow passed over his perfect features, gone so quickly that Jaina wondered if she had imagined it. "How do your studies progress?" "Very well," she said, warming to the conversation now that it was back on scholastic ground. "Watch!" She pointed to a squirrel perched in a high branch, nibbling on an apple, and murmured a spell. At once it transformed
into a sheep, a look of comical surprise on its face as the branch broke beneath its weight and it started to fall. Immediately Jaina extended a hand and the squirrel-sheep halted in midair. Gently she lowered it unharmed to the ground. It bleated at her, twitching its ears, and after a moment again resumed the shape of a very confused-looking squirrel. It sat on its haunches, chattered at her angrily, then with a flick of its fluffy tail leaped up into the tree again. Kael'thas chuckled. "Well done! No more setting books on fire, I hope?" Jaina turned scarlet, remembering the incident. When she'd first arrived, her talent with fire had needed some desperate honing. She'd accidentally incinerated a tome while working with Kael'thas-one he'd actually been holding at the time. He'd responded by insisting that for the next few months, she would need to practice all fire spells in the vicinity of the pools that encircled the prison area. "Er...no, that hasn't happened for a while." "I'm pleased to hear it. Jaina..." He stepped forward, tossing away the half-eaten apple, smiling gently. "I wasn't making idle conversation when I invited you to come to Quel'Thalas. Dalaran is a marvelous city, and some of the finest magi in Azeroth live here. I know you're learning much. But I think you would enjoy visiting an entire land where magic is so much a part of the culture. Not just a part of the city, or confined to a handful of elite, educated magi. Magic is the birthright of every citizen. We are all embraced by the Sunwell. Surely you must have some curiosity about it yourself?" She smiled at him. "I do indeed. And I would love to go there someday. But I think for the moment, my studies can be best advanced here." Her smile stretched into a grin. "Where people know what to do when I light books on fire." He chuckled at that, but his sigh was sad. "Perhaps you are right. And now if you will excuse me-" He gave her a wry grin. "Archmage Antonidas demands a recounting of my time in Silvermoon. Nonetheless, this prince and mage looks deeply forward to more demonstrations of how your training has advanced...and more time spent with you." Kael'thas placed a hand to his heart and bowed. Not knowing how to respond, Jaina settled for a curtsey, then watched him go, striding through the gardens like the sun, head high, every inch of him exuding confidence and coiled grace. Even the dirt seemed unwilling to cling to his boots and robe hem. Jaina crunched a final bite of the apple, then she, too, tossed it away. The
squirrel she'd polymorphed earlier scurried headfirst down the trunk, to claim a prize more reachable than the apple that still hung on the tree. A pair of hands abruptly covered her eyes. She started, but only in mild surprise-no one who posed a threat would be able to breach the powerful wards erected about the magical city. "Guess who?" a male voice whispered, but still holding tones of mirth. Jaina, her eyes covered, considered, fighting back a smile. "Hm.... your hands are calloused, so you're not a wizard," she said. "You smell like horses and leather...." Her own small hands brushed feather-light over strong fingers, touching a large ring. She felt the shape of the stone, the design-the seal of Lordaeron. "Arthas!" she exclaimed, surprise and delight warming her voice as she turned to face him. He uncovered her eyes at once, and grinned down at her. He was less physically perfect than Kael'thas; his hair, like the elven prince's, was blond, but simply yellow rather than looking like spun gold. He was tall and well-built, seeming solid rather than fluidly graceful to her. And despite the fact that he was of a rank equal to Kael'thas-although she wondered if privately Kael doubted that; the elves seemed to think themselves superior to all humans, regardless of rank-there was an ease about him that Jaina responded to immediately. Decorum returned to her and she dropped a curtsey. "Your Highness, this is an unlooked-for surprise. What are you doing here, if I may ask?" A sudden thought sobered her. "All is well in Capital City, is it not?" "Arthas, please. In Dalaran, the magi rule, and mere men must give deference." His sea-green eyes twinkled with good humor. "And we are comrades in mischief, after sneaking off to see the internment camps, aren't we?" She relaxed and smiled. "I suppose we are." "In answer to your question, everything is just fine. In fact, so little of real import is going on that my father agreed to my request to come here for a few months to study." "Study? But-you are a member of the Order of the Silver Hand. You're not going to become a mage, are you?" He laughed and drew her arm through his as they walked back toward the student's quarters. She easily fell in step with him. "Hardly. Such intellectual dedication is beyond me, I fear. But it did occur to me that one of the best places in Azeroth to learn about history, the
nature of magic, and other things a king needs to know about is right here in Dalaran. Fortunately, Father and your archmage agreed." As he spoke, he covered Jaina's hand, resting on his arm, with his own. It was a friendly and courteous gesture, but Jaina felt a little spark go through her. She glanced up at him. "I'm impressed. The boy who sneaked me out in the middle of the night to go spying on orcs was not quite so interested in history and knowledge." Arthas chuckled and bent his head conspiratorially down to hers. "Honestly? I'm still not. I mean, I am, but that's not the real reason I came here." "All right, now I'm confused. Why did you come to Dalaran then?" They had reached her quarters and she stopped, turning to face him and releasing his arm. He didn't answer at first, merely held her gaze with his and smiled knowingly. Then he took her hand and kissed it-a courtly gesture, one she had experienced many times from many noble gentlemen. His lips lingered just an instant longer than was strictly proper, and he didn't release her hand at once. Her eyes widened. Was he implying...had he really contrived to come to Dalaran for a few months-no mean feat, Antonidas was notoriously leery of outsiders-simply...to see her? Before she could recover sufficiently to ask the question, he winked at her and bowed. "I will see you tonight at dinner, my lady."
 
The dinner was a formal one. The return of Prince Kael'thas and the arrival of Prince Arthas on the same day had sent those who served the Kirin Tor into a flurry of activity. There was a large dining room that was reserved for special occasions, and it was here that the dinner was hosted. A table large enough to seat over two dozen stretched from one end of the room to the other. Overhead, three chandeliers twinkled with brightly burning candles, echoed by the candles burning on the table. Sconces along the walls held torches, and to keep the ambiance gentle while still providing sufficient illumination, several globes hovered around the sides of the room, ready to be summoned where a little extra light might be needed. Servants rarely intruded, save to bring out and clear the courses; bottles of wine poured themselves with the flick of a finger. Flute, harp, and lute provided soothing
background music, their graceful notes created by magic rather than human hands or breaths of air. Archmage Antonidas presided in one of his rare appearances. He was a tall man, seeming all the taller because of his extremely thin build. His long beard now had much more gray than brown in it, and his head was completely bald, but his eyes were alert and piercing. Present also was Archmage Krasus, upright and alert, his hair catching the candle-and torchlight to gleam mostly silver, with red and black streaks. Many others were in attendance, all of high rank. Jaina, in fact, was far and away the lowest-ranking person present, and she was the archmage's apprentice. Jaina came from a military background, and one of the things her father had instilled in her was a solid understanding of her strengths and weaknesses. "It is as much of a mistake to underestimate yourself as to overestimate yourself," Daelin had once told her. "False modesty is as bad as false pride. Know exactly what you are capable of at any moment, and act accordingly. Any other path is folly-and could be deadly in battle." She knew she was deft in the magical arts. She was intelligent and focused, and had learned much in the short time she had already been here. Surely Antonidas would not take on an apprentice as a charity case. With no sense of the false pride her father had warned her so judiciously about, she understood she had the potential to become a powerful mage. She wanted to succeed on her own merit, not be advanced because an elven prince enjoyed her company. She fought to keep her face from betraying her irritation as she spooned up another mouthful of turtle bisque. The conversation, not surprisingly as the internment camps were located fairly close to Dalaran, focused on the orcs, although the mage city liked to think itself above such things. Kael reached a long, elegant hand for another slice of bread and began buttering it. "Lethargic or no," he said, "they are dangerous." "My father, King Terenas, agrees with your assessment, Prince Kael'thas," Arthas said, smiling charmingly at the elf. "That's why the camps exist. It is unfortunate that they cost so much to maintain, but surely, a little gold is a small price for the safety of the people of Azeroth." "They are beasts, brutes," said Kael'thas, his normally tenor voice dropping in his disgust. "They and their dragons damaged Quel'Thalas badly. Only the Sunwell's energies prevented them from wreaking even more havoc than they did. You humans could solve the problem of protecting your people
without taxing them so severely by simply executing the creatures." Jaina recalled the one glimpse she had seen of the orcs. They had looked weary to her, broken and dejected. They'd had children with them. "Have you been to the camps, Prince Kael'thas?" she said tartly, speaking before she could stop herself. "Have you actually seen what they have become?" Color rose in Kael'thas's cheeks for a moment, but he kept his expression pleasant. "No, Lady Jaina, I have not. Nor do I see any need to. I see what they have done whenever I behold the burned trunks of the glorious trees of my homeland, and pay my respects to those slain in that attack. And surely you have not seen them, either. I cannot imagine that so refined a lady would wish to be given a tour of the camps." Jaina very carefully did not look at Arthas as she replied, "While His Highness gives me a lovely compliment, I do not think that refinement has any bearing on one's desire to see justice. Indeed, I think it rather more likely that a refined individual would not wish to see sentient beings slaughtered like animals." She gave him a pleasant smile and continued eating her soup. Kael'thas gave her a searching look, confused by her reaction. "The law is Lordaeron's, and King Terenas may do as he sees fit in his own realm," Antonidas broke in. "Dalaran and every other Alliance kingdom also must pay for their upkeep," said a mage Jaina did not know. "Surely we have a voice in this, since we are paying for it?" Antonidas waved a thin hand. "It is not the issue of who pays for the camps, or indeed whether the camps are even necessary. It is this strange lethargy of the orcs that intrigues me. I have researched what little we have on orcish history, and I do not believe it is confinement that renders them so listless. Nor do I believe it is an illness-at least, not one that we need worry about contracting." Because Antonidas never indulged in idle chatter, everyone stopped their bickering and turned to listen to him. Jaina was surprised. This was the first she had heard from any of the magi regarding the orcish situation at all. She had no doubt that this was a deliberate decision on Antonidas's part to reveal this information at this time. With both Arthas and Kael'thas present, word would travel swiftly throughout Lordaeron and Quel'Thalas. Antonidas did little by accident. "If it is not an illness, nor a direct result of their internment," Arthas said
pleasantly, "then what do you think it is, Archmage?" Antonidas turned toward the young prince. "It is my understanding that the orcs were not always so bloodthirsty. Khadgar told me what he had learned from Garona, who-" "Garona was the half-breed who murdered King Llane," Arthas said, all trace of good humor gone. "With all due respect, I do not think we can trust anything such a creature says." Antonidas lifted up a calming hand, as some of the others began to murmur agreement. "This information came before she turned traitor," he said. "And it has been verified through-other sources." He smiled a little, deliberately refusing to identify what "other sources" he had consulted. "They committed themselves to demonic influence. Their skin turned green, their eyes red. I believe they were saturated with this external darkness by the time of the first invasion. Now they have been cut off from that source of sustenance. I think we are seeing not an illness, but withdrawal. Demonic energy is a potent thing. To be denied it would have dire consequences." Kael'thas waved a hand dismissively. "Even if such a theory is correct, why should we care about them? They were foolish enough to trust demons. They were thoughtless enough to permit themselves to become addicted to these corruptive energies. I, for one, do not think it is wise to 'help' them find a cure for this addiction, even if it could return them to a peaceful state. Right now, they are powerless and crushed. It is how I-and anyone in his right mind-prefer to see them, after what they have done to us." "Ah, but if they can be returned to a peaceful state, then we will not have to keep them locked up in the camps, and the money can be distributed elsewhere," Antonidas said mildly, before the entire table could erupt in argument. "I'm sure King Terenas does not levy these fees simply to line his own pockets. How does your father fare, Prince Arthas? And your family? I regret that I was unable to attend your initiation ceremony, but I hear it was quite the event." "Stormwind was most gracious to me," Arthas said, smiling warmly and digging into the second course of delicately broiled trout served with sautéed greens. "It was good to see King Varian again." "His lovely queen has recently provided him with an heir, I understand." "Indeed. And if the way little Anduin grips my finger is any indication of how he'll grip a sword one day, he'll make a fine warrior." "While we all pray your coronation day is many years distant, I daresay
that a royal wedding would be welcomed," Antonidas continued. "Have any young ladies caught your eye, or are you still Lordaeron's most eligible bachelor?" Kael'thas turned his attention to his plate, but Jaina knew he was following the conversation keenly. She kept her own face carefully composed. Arthas did not look in her direction as he laughed and reached for the wine. "Ah, that would be telling, would it not? And where's the fun in that? There's plenty of time left for such things." Mixed feelings washed over Jaina. She was a little disappointed, but also somewhat relieved. Perhaps it was best if she and Arthas remained only friends. After all, she had come here to learn how to be the most accomplished mage she could become, not flirt. A student of magic needed to be disciplined, to be logical, not emotional. She had duties, and needed to perform them with her full attention. She needed to study.
 
"I need to study," Jaina protested a few days after the dinner, when Arthas approached her leading two horses. "Come on, Jaina." Arthas grinned. "Even the most diligent student needs to take a break now and then. It's a beautiful day and you should be out enjoying it." "I am," she said. It was true; she was in the gardens with her books, rather than cloistered in one of the reading rooms. "A bit of exercise will help you think better." He extended a hand to her as she sat underneath the tree. She smiled despite herself. "Arthas, you will be a magnificent king one day," she said teasingly, grasping his hand and allowing herself to be pulled to her feet. "No one can seem to deny you anything." He laughed at that and held her horse while she mounted. She was wearing trousers today, light linen breeches, and was able to sit astride rather than sidesaddle with long robes. He swung up easily on his own horse a moment later. Jaina glanced at the horse he was riding-a bay mare, rather than the white stallion fate had snatched from him. "I don't think I ever said how sorry I was about Invincible," she said quietly. The mirth left his face, and it
was like a shadow passing over the sun. Then the smile returned, slightly sobered. "It's all right, but thanks. Now-I have picnic supplies and the day awaits. Let's go!" It was a day Jaina would remember for the rest of her life, one of those perfect late summer days where the sunlight seemed thick and golden as honey. Arthas set a hard pace, but Jaina was an experienced rider and kept up easily. He took her far away from the city and along stretches of green, expansive meadows. The horses seemed to be enjoying themselves as much as their riders, their ears pricked forward and their nostrils flaring as they inhaled the rich scents. The picnic was simple but delicious fare-bread, cheese, fruit, some light white wine. Arthas lay back, folding his arms behind his head, and dozed for a bit while Jaina kicked off her boots, digging her feet into the thick, soft grass as she sat with her back to a tree, and read for a while. The book was interesting-A Treatise on the Nature of Teleportation-but the languid heat of the day, the vigorous exercise, and the soft hum of cicadas served to lull her to sleep as well.
 
Jaina awoke some time later slightly chilled; the sun was starting to go down. She sat up, knuckling the sleep out of her eyes, to realize that Arthas was nowhere to be seen. Nor was his horse. Her own gelding, reins draped about a tree branch, grazed contentedly. Frowning, she got to her feet. "Arthas?" There was no answer. Likely he had just decided to go for a quick exploration and would be back any moment. She strained to listen for the sound of hoofbeats, but there were none. There were still orcs loose, wandering around. Or so the rumors went. And mountain cats and bears-less alien but no less dangerous. Mentally Jaina went over her spells in her mind. She was sure she'd be able to defend herself if she was attacked. Well-fairly sure. The attack was sudden and silent. A thump against the back of her neck and cold wetness was the first and only clue she had. She gasped and whirled. Her attacker was a blur of motion, leaping to another hiding space with the speed of a stag, pausing only long
enough to fire another missile at her. This one caught her in the mouth and she started to choke-with laughter. She pawed at the snow, gasping a little as some of it slid down her shirt. "Arthas! You don't fight fair!" Her answer was four snowballs rolled in her direction, and she scrambled to pick them up. He'd obviously climbed high enough to find the places in the mountains where winter had come early, and returned with snowballs as trophies. Where was he? There-a flash of his red tunic- The fight continued for a while, until both had run out of ammunition. "Truce!" Arthas called, and when Jaina agreed, laughing so hard she could barely get the word out, he leaped from his place of concealment among the rocks and ran to her. He hugged her, laughing as well, and she was pleased to see that he, too, had traces of snow in his hair. "I knew it all those years ago," he said. "Knew w-what?" Jaina had been pelted with so many snowballs that despite the fact that it was late summer, she was chilled. Arthas felt her shivering and tightened his arms around her. Jaina knew she should pull back; a friendly and spontaneous hug was one thing, but to linger in his embrace was something else. But she stayed where she was, letting her head rest against his chest, her ear pressed against his heart, hearing it thump rhythmically and rapidly. She closed her eyes as one hand came up to stroke her hair, removing bits of snow as he spoke. "The day I first saw you, I thought that this would be a girl I could have fun with. Someone who wouldn't mind going for a swim on a hot summer day, or"-he stepped back a little, brushing a few bits of melting pieces of winter off her face and smiling-"or getting a snowball in the face. I didn't hurt you, did I?" She smiled in return, suddenly warmed. "No. No you didn't." Their eyes met and Jaina felt heat coming to her cheeks. She moved to step back, but his arm encircled her as firmly as an iron band. He continued to touch her face, trailing strong, calloused fingers down the curve of her cheek. "Jaina," he said quietly, and she shivered, but not from cold, not this time. It was not proper. She should move back. Instead she lifted her face and closed her eyes. The kiss was gentle at first, soft and sweet, the first Jaina had ever known. As if of their own will, her arms crept up to drape around his neck and she pressed against him as the kiss deepened. She felt as though she was
drowning, and he was the only solid thing in the world. This was what-who-she wanted. This youth who was her friend despite his title, who saw and understood her scholarly character but also knew how to coax forth the playful and adventurous girl who didn't often have a chance to come out-who wasn't often glimpsed. But he had seen all of who she was, not just the face she presented to the world. "Arthas," she whispered as she clung to him. "Arthas..."
CHAPTER SEVEN
It was a good few months, in Dalaran. Arthas found, somewhat to his surprise, that he actually was learning things that would be useful for a king to know. There were also plenty of opportunities to enjoy the lingering summer and first cool hints of autumn, and he loved riding, even if he felt a pang in his chest every time he mounted a horse that was not Invincible. And there was Jaina. He'd not planned on kissing her initially. But when he found himself with her in his arms, her eyes bright with laughter and good humor, he'd done so. And she'd responded. Her schedule was more demanding and rigorous than his, and they had not seen each other nearly as much as they had wanted to. When they had, it was usually at public functions. And both had agreed without discussing it at all that it would not do to give the rumor mill any grist. It lent an extra spice to the relationship. They stole moments when they could-a kiss in an alcove, a fleeting look at a formal dinner. Their first outing had been completely innocent at the outset; but now they avoided such things assiduously. He memorized her schedule so as to "bump" into her. She found excuses to wander into the stables or in the courtyard that Arthas and his men used as practice areas to keep their battle skills sharp. Arthas loved every risky, daring minute of it. Now he waited in a little-used hallway, standing in front of a bookshelf, pretending to peruse the titles. Jaina would be coming in from her fire spell practice; out of habit, she told him with a slightly embarrassed grin, she still trained near the jail area and the many pools of water. She'd have to cross through this area to get to her room. His ears strained for the sound. There it was-the soft, swift pad of her slippered feet moving across the floor. He turned, taking a book down and pretending to look at it, watching for her out of the corner of her eye. Jaina was clad, as usual, in traditional apprentice robes. Her hair looked
like sunshine and her face was set in her typical expression of a concentrated furrow, one of deep thought, not displeasure. She hadn't even noticed him. Quickly he put the book away and darted out into the hallway before she could get too far, grasping her arm and tugging her into the shadows. As ever, she was never startled by him, and met him halfway, clutching the books to her chest with one arm while the other went around his neck as they kissed. "Hello, my lady," he murmured, kissing her neck, grinning against her skin. "Hello, my prince," she murmured happily, sighing. "Jaina," came a voice, "why are you-" They sprang apart guiltily, staring at the intruder. Jaina gasped softly and color sprang to her face. "Kael..." The elf's face was carefully composed, but anger burned in his eyes, and his jaw was set. "You dropped a book as you left," he said, lifting the tome. "I followed you to return it." Jaina glanced up at Arthas, biting her lower lip. He was as startled as she, but he forced an easy smile. He kept his arm around Jaina as he turned to Kael'thas. "That's very kind of you, Kael," he said. "Thanks." For a moment, he thought Kael'thas would attack him. Anger and outrage fairly crackled around the mage. He was powerful, and Arthas knew that he wouldn't stand a chance. Even so, he kept his gaze even with the elven prince's, not backing down an inch. Kael'thas clenched his fists and remained where he was. "Ashamed of her are you, Arthas?" Kael'thas hissed. "Is she only worth your time and attention if no one knows about her?" Arthas's eyes narrowed. "I had thought to avoid the ravages of the rumor mill," he said quietly. "You know how those things work, Kael, don't you? Someone says something and next thing you know, it's believed to be true. I would protect her reputation by-" "Protect?" Kael'thas barked the word. "If you cared about her, you would court her openly, proudly. Any man would." He looked at Jaina, and the anger was gone, replaced by a fleeting expression of pain. Then that, too, disappeared. Jaina looked down. "I will leave you two to your...tryst. And do not fear, I will say nothing." With an angry hiss, he scornfully tossed the book toward Jaina. The tome,
likely invaluable, landed with a thump at Jaina's feet, and she started at the sound. Then he was gone in a swirl of violet and gold robes. Jaina let out her breath and laid her head on Arthas's chest. Arthas patted her back gently. "It's all right, he's gone now." "I'm sorry. I guess I should have told you." His chest contracted. "Told me what? Jaina-are you and he-" "No!" she answered at once, gazing up at him. "No. But-I think he wanted to. I just-he's a good man, and a powerful mage. And a prince. But he's not..." Her voice trailed off. "He's not what?" The words came out sharper than he had intended. Kael was so many things Arthas wasn't. Older, more sophisticated, experienced, powerful, and almost impossibly physically perfect. He felt jealousy growing inside him in a cold, hard knot. If Kael had reappeared at that moment, Arthas wasn't so sure he wouldn't take a swing at him. Jaina smiled softly, the furrow in her brow uncreasing. "He's not you." The icy knot inside him melted like winter retreating before the warmth of spring, and he pulled her to him and kissed her again. Who cared what a stuffy elven prince thought anyway?
 
The year unfolded largely without incident. As summer gave way to a crisp fall and then winter, more complaints rose about the cost of tending to the orc camps, but both Terenas and Arthas expected such. Arthas continued to train with Uther. The older man was adamant that while training at arms was important, so was prayer and meditation. "Yes, we must be able to cut down our enemies," he said. "But we must also be able to heal our friends and ourselves." Arthas thought about Invincible. His thoughts always drifted to the horse in winter, and Uther's comment only reminded him yet again of what he regarded as the one failure in his entire life. If only he had begun training earlier, the great white stallion would still be alive. He had never revealed to anyone exactly what had happened on that snowy day. They all believed it was an accident. And it was, Arthas told himself. He had not deliberately intended to harm Invincible. He loved the horse; he would sooner have harmed himself. And if he'd begun paladin training earlier, like Varian had done with sword fighting, he'd have been able to save Invincible. He swore that would not happen again. He would do whatever was necessary so that he
would never be caught unawares and impotent, would never not be able to make it right. The winter passed, as all winters must, and spring came to Tirisfal Glades again. And so did Jaina Proudmoore, arriving and looking to Arthas as beautiful, fresh, and welcome a sight as the new blossoms on the awakening trees. She had come to assist him in publicly celebrating Noblegarden, the major spring celebration in Lordaeron and Stormwind. Arthas found that staying up late the night before, sipping wine and filling eggs with candy and other treats, was not quite the boring task it would have been had Jaina not been there with him, her brow furrowed in the endearing fashion he had come to recognize as hers and hers alone, as she carefully and intently filled the eggs and set them aside. While there was still no public announcement, Arthas and Jaina both knew their parents had spoken with one another, and there was a tacit agreement that the courtship would be permitted. So it was that more and more Arthas, beloved already by his people, was sent to represent Lordaeron at public functions rather than Uther or Terenas. With the passing of time, Uther had increasingly withdrawn into the spiritual aspect of the Light, and Terenas seemed more than content to not have to travel. "It is exciting when you are young, to travel for days on horseback and sleep under the stars," he told Arthas. "When you are my age, though, horseback riding is best left for recreation, and the stars one can glimpse by looking out the window are quite close enough." Arthas had grinned, diving with pleasure into the new responsibilities. Admiral Proudmoore and Archmage Antonidas had apparently come to the same conclusions. For more and more often, when messengers from Dalaran were sent to Capital City, Lady Jaina Proudmoore accompanied them. "Come for the Midsummer Fire Festival," he said suddenly. She looked up at him, holding an egg carefully in one hand, brushing a lock of golden hair from her face with the other. "I can't. Summer is a very intensive time for the students at Dalaran. Antonidas has already told me to expect to stay there the whole time." Regret was in her voice. "Then I'll come visit you for Midsummer, and you can come for Hallow's End," Arthas said. She shook her head and laughed at him. "You are persistent, Arthas Menethil. I will try." "No, you'll come." He reached across the table, littered with carefully
hollowed out, brightly painted eggs and small candies, and placed his hand over hers. She smiled, still a little shy after all this time, her cheeks turning pink. She would come.
 
There were several smaller festivals leading up to Hallow's End. One was somber, one was celebratory, and this one was a bit of both. It was believed to be a time when the barrier between the living and the dead was thin, and those who had passed on could be sensed by those still alive. Tradition had it that at the end of the harvest season, before the winds of winter began to blow, that a straw effigy would be erected right outside the palace. At sunset on the night of the ceremony, it would be lit on fire. It was an awesome sight -a giant flaming wicker man, burning bright against the encroaching night. Anyone who wished could approach the fiery effigy, toss a branch into the cracking flames, and in so doing metaphorically "burn away" anything he did not wish to carry into the quiet, deep reflection time provided by winter's enforced inactivity. It was a peasant ritual, sprung up from time immemorial. Arthas suspected that few nowadays truly believed that tossing a branch into a fire would really solve their problems; even fewer believed that contact with the dead was possible. He certainly didn't. But it was a popular celebration, and it brought Jaina back to Lordaeron, and for those reasons, he was looking forward to it. He had a little surprise for her in mind. It was right after sunset. The crowds had begun gathering in late afternoon. Some had even brought picnics and made an event out of enjoying the last few days of late autumn among the hills of Tirisfal. There were guards stationed about, keeping an eye out for the mishaps that often happen when large numbers of people are gathered in one place, but Arthas really didn't expect any difficulties. When he came out of the palace, clad in a tunic, breeches, and cloak of rich autumnal hues, cheers erupted. He paused and waved at the onlookers, accepting their applause, then turned and extended his hand to Jaina. She looked a little surprised, but smiled, and the cheers now lifted her name to the darkening sky as well as his. Arthas and Jaina walked down the path to the giant wicker man and stood before it. Arthas held up a hand for
silence. "My countrymen, I join you in celebration of this most revered of nights -the night when we remember those who are no longer with us, and cast aside the things that hold us back. We burn the effigy of the wicker man as a symbol of the year that is passing, much as the farmers burn the remains of the harvested fields. The ashes nourish the soil, and this rite nourishes our souls. It is good to see so many here tonight. I am pleased to be able to offer the distinct honor of lighting the wicker man to Lady Jaina Proudmoore." Jaina's eyes went wide. Arthas turned to her, grinning wickedly. "She is the daughter of war hero Admiral Daelin Proudmoore, and promises to be a powerful mage in her own right. As magi are masters of fire, I think it only right that she light our wicker man this evening. Do you agree?" Those assembled roared with delight, as Arthas knew they would. Arthas bowed at Jaina, then leaned in and whispered, "Give them a show-they'll love it." Jaina nodded imperceptibly, then turned to the crowd and waved. Their cheering increased. She tucked a lock of hair behind her ear, briefly revealing her nervousness, then composed her face. She closed her eyes and lifted her hands, murmuring an incantation. Jaina was dressed in fire hues of red, yellow, and orange. As small balls of flame began to materialize in her hands, glowing faintly at first and then with increasing brightness, she looked to Arthas like fire itself for a moment. She held the fire in her hands with ease, comfort, and mastery, and he knew that the days when she had little control over her spells were long gone. She wasn't going to "become" a powerful mage; she obviously already was one, in fact if not in title. And then she extended both hands. The balls of fire leaped like a bullet fired from a gun, hurtling toward the enormous straw effigy. It erupted into flame at once, and the onlookers gasped, then broke into wild applause. Arthas grinned. The wicker man never caught on fire that quickly when an ordinary brand was touched to its base. Jaina opened her eyes at the sound and waved, smiling delightedly. Arthas leaned close and whispered, "Spectacular, Jaina." "You asked me to give them a show," she shot back, grinning at him. "Indeed I did. But that was almost too good a show. They're going to demand that you light the wicker man every year now I'm afraid."
She turned to look at him. "Would that be a problem?" The light from the blazing fire danced over her, illuminating her lively features, catching the glint of a gold circlet adorning her head. Arthas caught his breath as he regarded her. She'd always been attractive to him, and he'd liked her from the moment they'd met. She'd been a friend, a confidant, an exciting flirtation. But now he couldn't help but see her, quite literally, in a whole new light. It took a moment for him to find his voice. "No," he said softly. "No, it wouldn't be a problem at all." They joined the throngs dancing by the fire that night, causing the guards no end of consternation as they went right down among the populace and shook hands and exchanged greetings. And then they gave the dutiful guards the slip, losing themselves in the crowd and stealing away unnoticed. Arthas led her through the back corridors to the private living quarters of the palace. Once they were almost caught by some servants taking a shortcut to the kitchens, and had to flatten themselves against the wall and stay perfectly still for several long moments. Then they were in Arthas's rooms. He closed the door, leaned back up against it, and swept her into his arms, kissing her deeply. But it was she, shy, studious Jaina, who broke the kiss and moved toward the bed, leading him by the hand, the orange light from the still-blazing wicker man outside dancing on their skin. He followed, almost as in a daze, a dream, as they stood beside the bed, their hands clasped so tightly Arthas feared her fingers would snap in his grip. "Jaina," he whispered. "Arthas," she said, the word a whimper, and kissed him again, her hands reaching up to clasp his face between her hands. He was dizzy with wanting her, and felt suddenly bereft as she drew back. Her breath was soft and warm on his face as she whispered, "I...are we ready for this?" He started to answer flippantly, but he knew what she was really asking. He could not imagine being more ready to bring this girl the rest of the way into his heart. He had turned down the lovely Taretha, and she had not been the first he had said no to. Jaina, he knew, was even less experienced than he in such matters. "I am if you are," he whispered hoarsely, and as he bent to kiss her again, he saw the familiar furrow of worry cross her brow. I will kiss it away, he vowed, bringing her onto the bed with him. I will make everything you could
ever worry about go away forever. Later, when the wicker man had finally burned out and the only light on Jaina's sleeping form was the cool blue-white of moonlight, Arthas still lay awake, running his fingers along the curves of her body and alternately wondering where this would all lead and feeling content to simply be in the moment. He had not tossed in a branch to the wicker man fire, because he had nothing he wished to be rid of. Nor did he now, he thought, bending forward to kiss her. Jaina awakened with a soft sigh, reaching for him. "No one can seem to deny you anything," she murmured, repeating the words she had said to him the day of their first kiss, "least of all me." He clutched her to him then, a sudden cold shivering over him, though he had no idea why. "Don't deny me, Jaina. Don't ever deny me. Please." She looked up at him, eyes glittering in the cool moonlight. "I never would, Arthas. Never."
CHAPTER EIGHT
The palace had never been so cheerily decorated for the Feast of Winter Veil as it was this year. Muradin, ever a good ambassador of his people, had brought the dwarven tradition to Lordaeron upon his arrival. Over the years it had increased in popularity, and this year the people seemed to truly take it to heart. The festive tone had been established a few weeks earlier, when Jaina had delighted them so with her theatrical display of igniting the wicker man. She had been granted permission to stay through the winter if she so chose, although Dalaran was not far to one who could teleport herself. Something had changed. It was both subtle and profound. Jaina Proudmoore was starting to be treated as more than the daughter of the ruler of Kul Tiras, more than a friend. She was starting to be treated as a member of the royal family. Arthas first realized it when his mother took both Jaina and Calia to be fitted for the formal dresses fashion required for the Winter Veil Eve ball. Other guests had spent Winter Veil here; Lianne had never before wanted to coordinate their outfits with her own and that of her daughter. Too, Terenas now often requested that Jaina join him and Arthas when they sat to listen to the peoples' petitions. She sat on the king's left, Arthas on his right. In a position nearly equal to the king's own son. Well, Arthas thought, he supposed that it was the logical conclusion. Wasn't it? He recalled his words to Calia years ago: "We each have our duties, I guess. You to marry whomever Father wants, and me to marry well for the kingdom." Jaina would be good for the kingdom. Jaina, he thought, would be good for him, too. So why did the thought make him feel so uneasy?
 
They had fresh snow for the night before Winter Veil. Arthas stood looking
out of a large window at Lordamere Lake, frozen over now. The snow had begun falling at dawn, and had stopped about an hour ago. The sky was black velvet, the stars small icy diamonds against the soft darkness, and moonlight made everything look still, hushed, and magical. A soft hand slipped into his. "Beautiful, isn't it?" Jaina said quietly. Arthas nodded, not looking at her. "Plenty of ammunition." "What?" "Ammunition," Jaina repeated. "For snowball fights." He finally turned to her and his breath caught. He'd not been permitted to see the gowns she, Calia, and his mother would be wearing to the banquet and ball this evening, and he was stunned by her beauty. Jaina Proudmoore looked like a snow maiden. From shoes that looked to be made of ice, to a white gown tinged with the palest blue to the circlet of silver that caught the warm glow of the torchlight, she was heartbreakingly lovely. But she was no ice queen, no statue; she was warm and soft and alive, her golden hair flowing about her shoulders, her cheeks pink beneath his admiring gaze, her blue eyes bright with happiness. "You're like...a white candle," he said. "All white and gold." He reached for a lock of her hair, twirling it about his fingers. She grinned. "Yes," she laughed, reaching to touch his own bright locks, "the children will almost certainly be blond." He froze. "Jaina-are you-" She chuckled. "No. Not yet. But there's no reason to think we won't be able to have children." Children. Again, the word that galvanized him in shock and peculiar distress. She was talking about the children they would have. His mind galloped into the future, a future with Jaina as his wife, their children in the palace, his parents gone, himself on the throne, the weight of the crown on his head. Part of him desperately wanted that. He loved having Jaina by his side, loved holding her in his arms at night, loved the taste and smell of her, loved her laughter, pure as a bell and sweet as the scent of roses. He loved- What if he ruined it? Because suddenly he knew that until this moment, it had all been child's play. He'd thought of Jaina as a companion, just as she had been since his boyhood, except their games were now of a more adult nature. But something
had suddenly shifted inside him. What if this was real? What if he really was in love with her, and she with him? What if he was a bad husband, a bad king -what if- "I'm not ready," he blurted. Her brow furrowed. "Well, we do not have to have little ones right away." She squeezed his hand in what was clearly intended to be a gesture of reassurance. Arthas suddenly dropped her hand and took a step backward. Her frown deepened in confusion. "Arthas? What's wrong?" "Jaina-we're too young," he said, speaking rapidly, his voice rising slightly. "I'm too young. There's still-I can't-I'm not ready." She paled. "You aren't-I thought-" Guilt racked him. She'd asked him this, the night they became lovers. Are you ready for this? she had whispered. I am if you are, he had replied, and he'd meant it.... He really had thought he'd meant it.... Arthas reached out and grabbed her hands, trying desperately to articulate the emotions racing through him. "I still have so much to learn. So much training to complete. And Father needs me. Uther's got so much he needs to teach and-Jaina, we've always been friends. You've always understood me so well. Can't you understand me now? Can't we still be friends?" Her bloodless lips opened but no words came out at first. Her hands were limp in his. Almost frantically he squeezed them. Jaina, please. Please understand-even if I don't. "Of course, Arthas." Her voice was a monotone. "We'll always be friends, you and I." Everything, from her posture to her face to her voice, bespoke her pain and her shock. But Arthas clung instead to her words as a wave of relief, so profound it made his knees weak, swept over him. It was all going to be just fine. It might upset her now, a little, but surely she'd understand soon. They knew each other. She'd figure out that he was right, that it was too soon. "I mean-this isn't forever," he said, feeling the need to explain. "Just for now. You've got studying to do-I'm sure I've been a distraction. Antonidas probably resents me." She said nothing. "This is for the best. Maybe one day it'll be different and we can try again. It's not that I don't-that you-"
He pulled her into his arms and hugged her. She was stiff as stone for a moment, then he felt the tension leave her and her arms went around him. They stood alone in the hall for a long time, Arthas resting his cheek against her bright gold hair, the hair that, no doubt, their children would indeed have been born with. Might still be born with. "I don't want to close the door," he said quietly. "I just-" "It's all right, Arthas. I understand." He stepped back, his hands on her shoulders, peering into her eyes. "Do you?" She laughed slightly. "Honestly? No. But it's all right. It will be eventually, anyway. I know that." "Jaina, I just want to make sure this is right. For both of us." I don't want to mess this up. I can't mess this up. She nodded. She took a deep breath and steadied herself, giving him a smile...a real, if hurting, smile. "Come, Prince Arthas. You need to escort your friend to the ball." Arthas somehow made it through the evening, and so did Jaina, although Terenas kept giving him strange glances. He didn't want to tell his father, not yet. It was a strained and unhappy night, and at one point during a pause in the dancing, Arthas looked out at the blanket of white snow and the moonsilvered lake, and wondered why everything bad seemed to happen in winter.
 
Lieutenant General Aedelas Blackmoore didn't look particularly happy to have this exclusive audience with King Terenas and Prince Arthas. In fact, he looked like he desperately would like to slink away unnoticed. The years had not been kind to him, neither physically nor in the hand fate had dealt him. Arthas recalled a handsome, rather dashing military commander who, while doubtless overfond of his drink, at least seemed able to keep the ravages of it at bay. No longer. Blackmoore's hair was streaked with gray, he had put on weight, and his eyes were bloodshot. He was, fortunately, stone-cold sober. Had he showed up to this meeting intoxicated, Terenas, a firm believer in the need for moderation in all things, would have refused to see him. Blackmoore was here today because he had messed up. Badly. Somehow the man's prized gladiator orc, Thrall, had escaped Durnholde in a fire. Blackmoore had tried to keep it quiet and conduct his search for the orc
personally and on a small scale, but a secret as large as a massive green orc could not be contained forever. Once word had gotten out, rumors flew wildly, of course-it was a rival lord who had freed the orc, anxious to ensure winning in the rings; it was a jealous mistress, hoping to embarrass him; it was a clever band of orcs unaffected by the strange lethargy-no, no, it was Orgrim Doomhammer himself; it was dragons, infiltrating disguised as humans, who lit the place afire with only their breath. Arthas had thought Thrall exciting to watch in combat, but he recalled that even then the thought had crossed his mind whether it was wise to train and educate an orc. When information had come that Thrall was on the loose, Terenas had summoned Blackmoore immediately for an accounting. "It was bad enough that you thought it a good idea to train an orc to fight in gladiatorial combat," Terenas began. "But to train him in military strategy, to teach him to read, to write...I must ask, Lieutenant General...what in the Light's name were you thinking?" Arthas smothered a grin as Aedelas Blackmoore seemed to physically diminish right in front of his eyes. "You assured me that the funds and materials went directly into stepping up security, and that your pet orc was securely guarded." Terenas continued, "And yet somehow, he is out there instead of safely inside Durnholde. How is that possible?" Blackmoore frowned and rallied somewhat. "It is certainly unfortunate that Thrall escaped. I'm sure you understand how I must feel." It was a hit on Blackmoore's part; Terenas still smarted from the fact that Doomhammer had escaped from under his very nose. But it wasn't a particularly wise hit. Terenas frowned and continued. "I hope this isn't part of some disturbing trend. The money is earned from the labor of the people, Lieutenant General. It goes toward keeping them safe. Do I need to send along a representative to ensure that the funds are properly distributed?" "No! No, no, that won't be necessary. I will account for every penny." "Yes," said Terenas with deceptive mildness, "you will." When Blackmoore finally left, bowing obsequiously the whole way out, Terenas turned to his son. "What are your thoughts on the situation? You saw Thrall in action." Arthas nodded. "He wasn't at all like I had imagined orcs to be. I mean... he was huge. And fought fiercely. But it was obvious he was also intelligent.
And trained." Terenas stroked his beard, thinking. "There are pockets of renegade orcs out there. Some who might not have this lassitude that the ones we've imprisoned have demonstrated. If Thrall were to find them and teach them what he knows, it could be a very bad thing for us." Arthas sat up straighter. This could be what he'd been looking for. "I've been training hard with Uther." And he had been. Unable to properly explain to others-and to himself-why he had ended the relationship with Jaina, he'd thrown himself into his training. He'd fought for hours a day until his body ached, attempting to sufficiently exhaust himself so that he could get her face out of his mind. It had been what he wanted, hadn't it? She'd taken it well. So why was it he who lay awake at night, missing her warmth and presence with a pain that bordered on agony? He had even embraced hitherto despised hours spent in still, silent meditation in an effort to distract himself. Maybe if he focused on fighting, on learning how to accept and channel and direct the Light, he could get the hell over her. Over the girl he himself had broken up with. "We could go looking for such orcs. Find them before Thrall does." Terenas nodded. "Uther has informed me of your dedication, and he's been impressed with your progress." He reached a decision. "Very well then. Go tell Uther and start preparing. It's time for your first taste of real battle." Arthas was hard put not to let out a whoop of excitement. He refrained, even in his delight picking up on the pained, worried look on his father's face. Maybe, just maybe, killing rebellious greenskins would erase the memory of Jaina's stricken expression when he'd ended their relationship. "Thank you, sir. I'll do you proud." Despite the regret in his father's blue-green eyes, so like Arthas's own, Terenas smiled. "That, my son, is the least of my worries."
CHAPTER NINE
Jaina raced through the gardens, late to her meeting with Archmage Antonidas. She'd done it again-lost track of time with her nose buried in a book. Her master was always chiding her about that, but she couldn't help it. Her slippered feet took her down between the rows of goldenbark apple trees, the fruit hanging heavy and ripe. She felt a brief brush of sorrow as she remembered a conversation held here only a few short years ago-when Arthas had appeared behind her, slipping his hands over her eyes, and whispering, "Guess who?" Arthas. She missed him still. She supposed she always would. The breakup had been unexpected and hurtful, and the timing couldn't have been worse-she still cringed as she thought about having to continue through the formal Winter Veil ball as if nothing had gone wrong-but as the initial shock had faded she had grown to understand his reasoning. They were both young yet and, as he had pointed out at the time, they had responsibilities and training to complete. She'd promised him they'd always stay friends, and she had meant it, then and afterward. In order for her to keep that promise, she had had to heal. And so she had done. Certainly much had happened in those few short years to keep her busy and focused elsewhere. Five years ago, a powerful wizard named Kel'Thuzad had drawn the ire of the Kirin Tor with his dabbling in unnatural necromantic magic. He had left, suddenly and mysteriously, after being severely reprimanded and told in no uncertain terms to cease his experiments immediately. The mystery had been one of many things that had helped distract her over the last three years. Outside the gates of the magical city, things had happened too, though information was scattered, rumor-ridden, and chaotic. As best Jaina had been able to determine, the escaped orc Thrall, now calling himself the warchief of the new Horde, had begun attacking the internment camps and freeing the captive orcs. Later, Durnholde itself had been razed by this self-styled warchief, crumbling into ruins as Thrall called forth what Jaina had learned
was the ancient shamanistic magic of his people. Blackmoore had fallen too, but by all accounts, he would not be mourned overlong. While troubled at what this new Horde might eventually mean for her people, Jaina could not find it in herself to mourn the loss of the camps. Not after what she had seen of them. Voices reached her ears, one raised in anger. So unusual was that in this place that Jaina slid to an abrupt halt. "As I told Terenas, your people are prisoners in their own lands. I repeat to you now-humanity is in peril. The tides of darkness have come again, and the whole world is poised upon the brink of war!" The voice was male, resonant and strong, and Jaina did not recognize it. "Ah, now I know who you must be. You are the rambling prophet who was the subject of King Terenas's last letter. And I am no more interested in your babble than he is." The other speaker was Antonidas, as calm as the stranger was insistent. Jaina knew that she should discreetly withdraw before she was noticed, but the same curiosity that had driven the girl she had been to go along with Arthas to spy on the orc encampments now prompted her to cloak herself in invisibility and learn more. She moved closer as quietly as possible. She could see them both now; the first speaker, whom Antonidas had sarcastically referred to as a "prophet," clad in a cloak and hood decorated with black feathers, and her master on horseback. "I thought Terenas was quite plain in his opinion of your predictions." "You must be wiser than the king! The end is near!" "I told you before, I'm not interested in this nonsense." Clipped, calm, dismissive. Jaina knew that tone of voice. The prophet was silent for a moment, then he sighed. "Then I've wasted my time here." Before Jaina's startled gaze, the stranger's shape blurred. It compressed and shifted, and where an instant before a man in a cowled robe had stood, now there was only a large black bird. With a caw of frustration, it sprang skyward, flapping its wings, and was gone. His eyes still on the interloper, now a vanishing dot in the blue sky, Antonidas said, "You can show yourself now, Jaina." Heat washed over Jaina's face. She murmured a counterspell and edged forward. "I'm sorry for eavesdropping, Master, but-" "It's your inquisitive nature that I've come to rely on, child," Antonidas said, chuckling a little. "That crazed fool's convinced that the world's about
to end. That's taking the whole 'plague' thing a bit far, in my opinion." "Plague?" Jaina started. Antonidas sighed and dismounted, sending his steed off with an amiable slap to the rear. The horse pranced a little, then trotted obediently off to the stables, where a groom would attend to him. The archmage beckoned to his apprentice, who stepped forward and took the outstretched, gnarled hand. "You will recall I sent some messengers to Capital City a short time ago." "I thought that was regarding the orc situtation." Antonidas murmured an incantation, and a few moments later they appeared in his private quarters. Jaina loved this place; loved the untidiness, the smell of parchment and leather and ink, and the old chairs into which one could curl and lose oneself in knowledge. He gestured for her to sit and with the crook of a finger had a pitcher pour nectar for them. "Well, that was on the agenda, yes, but my representatives thought that a more dire threat was at our doorstep." "More dire than the Horde re-forming?" Jaina extended her hand, and the crystal goblet, filled with golden liquid, floated into her palm. "Orcs, potentially, could be reasoned with. Disease cannot. There are reports of a plague spreading in the northlands. Something I think the Kirin Tor should be paying close attention to." Jaina peered at him, her brow furrowing as she sipped. Generally disease fell under the auspices of the priests, not magi. Unless- "You think it's magical in nature somehow?" He nodded his bald head. "It's a strong possibility. And that's why, Jaina Proudmoore, I am asking you to travel to these lands and investigate the matter." Jaina nearly choked on her nectar. "Me?" He smiled gently. "You. You have learned nearly everything I have to teach. It's time you utilized those skills outside of the safety of these towers." His eyes twinkled again. "And I have arranged for a special envoy to assist you."
 
Arthas lounged against a tree, turning his face up to the weak sunlight and closing his eyes. He knew he radiated calmness and confidence; he had to. His men were worrying enough for all of them. He couldn't let them see that he, too, was anxious. After all this time...how would they get along? Maybe
it hadn't been so smart a decision after all. But all the reports had been glowing, and he knew she had the most level of heads. It would work out all right. It had to. One of his captains, Falric, whom Arthas had known for years, stomped about, going a little way down one of the four paths at this crossroads, then returning to venture a short distance down another. His breath was visible in the chill, and his irritation was obviously growing by the minute. "Prince Arthas," he finally ventured, "we've been waiting here for hours. Are you sure this friend of yours is coming?" Arthas's lips curved in a slight smile as he answered without opening his eyes. The men had not been told, for reasons of security. "I'm sure." He was. He thought about all the other times he had patiently waited for her. "Jaina usually runs a little late." No sooner had the words left his lips than he heard a distant bellow and the barely decipherable words, "Me SMASH!" Like a panther dozing in the sun only to waken instantly alert, Arthas sprang to attention, hammer in hand. He started down the road, to see a slender, feminine shape racing toward him as she crested the hill into his vision. Behind her loomed what he knew to be an elemental-a swirling blob of aqua-colored water, with a crude head and limbs. And behind that...were two ogres. "By the Light!" cried Falric, starting to race forward. Arthas would have beaten him to the girl except for the fact that right at that moment, he caught sight of Jaina Proudmoore's face. She was grinning. "Stay your blade, Captain," Arthas said, feeling his own lips curve into a grin. "She can take care of herself." And so indeed the lady could-and efficiently. At that precise moment Jaina wheeled and began to summon fire. Arthas realized that if he was going to feel sorry for anyone in this conflict, it was the poor baffled ogres, bellowing in pain as fire licked their pudgy, pale forms and staring in shock at the tiny human female responsible for such astonishing agony. One of them had the sense to run, but the other, seemingly unable to believe it, kept coming. Jaina sent a blast of rumbling orange flame at it again, and it cried out and collapsed, burning to death quickly, the rank scent of charred flesh filling Arthas's nostrils. Jaina watched the second one flee, dusted her hands off, and nodded. She
hadn't even broken a sweat. "Gentlemen, meet Miss Jaina Proudmoore," Arthas drawled, walking up to his childhood friend and former lover. "Special agent to the Kirin Tor, and one of the most talented sorceresses in the land. Looks like you haven't lost your touch." She turned to face him, smiling up at him. There was no awkwardness in this moment, only happiness. She was glad to see him, and he her, the pleasure swelling inside him. "It's good to see you again." So much in so few, almost formal words. But she understood him. She had always understood him. Her eyes were sparkling as she replied, "You, too. It's been a while since a prince escorted me anywhere." "Yes," he said, a slight hint of ruefulness coloring his tone. "It has." Now it was awkward, and Jaina looked down and he cleared his throat. "Well, I guess we should get under way." She nodded, dismissing the elemental with a wave of her hand. "I don't need this fellow with such stalwart soldiers," she said, gifting Falric and his men with one of her best smiles. "So, Your Highness, what do you know about this plague we're to investigate?" "Not much," Arthas was forced to confess as they fell into step. "Father just now sent me to work with you. Uther's been fighting with me against the orcs most recently. But I'd guess that if the Dalaran wizards want to find out more about it, it's got something to do with magic." She nodded, still smiling, although her brow was starting to furrow in that familiar fashion. Arthas felt an odd pang as he noticed it. "Quite right. Although exactly how, I'm not sure. That's why Master Antonidas sent me to observe and report back. We should check out the villages along the King's road. Talk to the inhabitants-see if they know anything useful. Hopefully they have not been infected and this is nothing more serious than a localized outbreak of some sort." He, who knew her so well, could hear the doubt in her voice. He understood it. If Antonidas really believed it wasn't serious, he wouldn't have sent his prized apprentice to check it out-nor would King Terenas have sent his son. He changed the topic. "I wonder if it had anything to do with the orcs." At her raised eyebrow, he continued. "I'm sure you've heard about the escapes from the internment camps." She nodded. "Yes. I sometimes wonder if that little family we saw was
among those who escaped." He shifted uneasily. "Well, if they are, they might still be worshipping demons." Her eyes widened. "What? I thought that was stamped out long ago-that the orcs were no longer using demonic energy." Arthas shrugged. "Father sent Uther and me to help defend Strahnbrad. By the time I got there, orcs had already begun kidnapping villagers. We hunted them down at their encampment, but three men were...sacrificed." Jaina was listening now as she always did, not just with her ears but with her whole body, concentrating on every word with the focus that he remembered. Light, but she was beautiful. "The orcs said they were offering them up to their demons. Called it a paltry sacrifice-clearly they wanted more." "And Antonidas seems to think this plague is magical in nature," Jaina murmured. "I wonder if there is a connection. It's disheartening to hear that they have reverted so. Perhaps it is only a single clan." "Perhaps-or perhaps not." He recalled how Thrall had fought in the ring, recalled how even those ragtag orcs had put up a surprisingly good fight. "We can't afford to take risks. If we're attacked, my men have standing orders to kill them all." Briefly, he thought about the fury that raged in him when the orc leader had sent back his response to Uther's offer of surrender. The two men who had been sent in to parley had been killed, their horses returning riderless in a wordless, brutal message. "Let's get in there and destroy the beasts!" he'd cried, the weapon he had been given at his initiation into the Silver Hand glowing brightly. He would have charged in immediately had not Uther placed a restraining hand on his arm. "Remember, Arthas," he had said, his voice calm, "we are paladins. Vengeance cannot be a part of what we must do. If we allow our passions to turn to bloodlust, then we will become as vile as the orcs." The words penetrated the anger-somewhat. Arthas had clenched his teeth, watching as the frightened horses, their riders butchered, were led away. Uther's words were wisdom, but Arthas felt he had failed the men who'd been on those horses. Failed them, just as he'd failed Invincible, and now they were as dead as that great beast. He took a deep, steadying breath. "Yes, Uther." His calmness had been rewarded-Uther had charged him with leading
the attack. If only he'd been in time to save those three poor men. A gentle hand on his arm called him back to the present, and without thinking, out of old habit, he covered Jaina's hand with his own. She started to pull away, then gave him a slightly strained smile. "It's so very, very good to see you again," he said impulsively. Her smile softened, became genuine, and she squeezed his arm. "You, too, Your Highness. By the way, thanks for holding your man back when we met." The smile became a full-fledged grin. "I told you once before, I'm not a fragile little figurine." He chuckled. "Indeed not, my lady. You will fight alongside us in these battles." She sighed. "I pray there is no fighting-only investigating. But I will do what I must. I always have." Jaina withdrew her hand. Arthas hid his disappointment. "As we all do, my lady." "Oh stop that. I'm Jaina." "And I'm Arthas. Nice to meet you." She shoved him then, and they laughed, and suddenly a barrier was gone between them. His heart warmed as he looked down at her, at his side once again. They were facing real danger together for the first time. He was conflicted. He wanted to keep her safe, but he also wanted to let her shine in her abilities. Had he done the right thing? Was it too late? He'd told her that he wasn't ready, and that had been true-he hadn't been ready for a lot of things then. But much had changed since that Winter Veil. And some things hadn't changed at all. All kinds of emotions tore at him, and he pushed them all away except one: simple pleasure in her presence. They made camp that night before dusk, in a small clearing close to the road. There was no moonlight, only the stars, glittering in the ebony darkness above them. Jaina jokingly lit the fire, conjured some delicious breads and beverages, then declared, "I'm done." The men laughed and obligingly prepared the rest of the meal, skewering rabbits over spits and unpacking fruits. Wine was passed around, and the feeling was almost more of a group of comrades enjoying the evening than a battle-ready unit investigating a deadly plague. Afterward, Jaina sat a little bit away from the group. Her eyes were on the skies, a smile playing on her lips. Arthas joined her and offered her more wine. She held out her goblet while he poured and then took a sip.
"This is a lovely vintage, Your H-Arthas," she said. "One of the benefits of being a prince," he replied. He stretched out his long legs and lay down next to her, one arm behind his head as a pillow, the other arm holding the goblet steady on his chest as he looked up at the stars. "What do you think we're going to find?" "I don't know. I was sent as an investigator. I do wonder if it doesn't have something to do with demons, though, given your encounter with the orcs." He nodded in the darkness, then, realizing she couldn't see him, said, "I agree. I wonder if we shouldn't have brought a priest along with us now." She turned to smile at him. "You're a paladin, Arthas. The Light works through you. Plus, you swing a weapon better than any priest I've seen." He grinned at that. The moment hung between them, and just as he started to reach out a hand to her, she sighed and got to her feet, finishing the wine. "It's late. I don't know about you, but I'm exhausted. I'll see you in the morning. Sleep well, Arthas." But he couldn't sleep. He tossed and turned in his bedroll, staring up at the sky, the night sounds contriving to catch his attention even when he did start to drift off. He could take it no more. He'd always been impulsive, and he knew it, but dammit- He threw back the blankets and sat up. The camp was still. They were in no danger here, so there was no one set to watch. Quietly, Arthas rose and went to the area where he knew Jaina was sleeping. He knelt down beside her and brushed her hair back from her face. "Jaina," he whispered, "wake up." As she had done that night so long ago, she again awoke in silence and unafraid, blinking up at him curiously. He grinned. "You up for an adventure?" She tilted her head, smiling, the memories obviously coming back to her as well. "What sort of an adventure?" she countered. "Trust me." "I always have, Arthas." They spoke in whispers, their breath visible in the cold night air. She was propped up on one elbow now, and he imitated her, reaching with his other hand to touch her face. She did not pull back. "Jaina...I think there was a reason we were brought together again."
There it was, the little furrow in her brow. "Of course. Your father sent you because-" "No, no. More than that. We're working together as a team now. We- we work well that way." She was very still. He continued to caress the smooth curve of her cheek. "I-when this is all over-maybe we can...talk. You know." "About what ended at Winter Veil?" "No. Not about endings. About beginnings. Because things have felt very incomplete to me without you. You know me like no one else does, Jaina, and I've missed that." She was silent for a long moment, then sighed softly and leaned her cheek into his hand. He shivered as she turned her head and kissed his palm. "I have never been able to deny you, Arthas," she said, a hint of laughter in her voice. "And yes. It feels incomplete to me, too. I've missed you very much." Relief washed over him and he leaned forward, wrapping her in his arms and kissing her passionately. They would get to the bottom of this mystery together, solve it, and come home heroes. Then they'd get married-maybe in the spring. He wanted to see her showered with rose petals. And later there'd be those fair-haired children Jaina had talked about. They were not intimate, not here, surrounded as they were by Arthas's men, but he did join her under the blankets until the steely dawn called him reluctantly back to his own bed. Before he left, though, he caught her in his arms and held her tightly. He did sleep a little then, secure in the knowledge that nothing-no plague, no demon, no mystery could stand up to the joined efforts of Prince Arthas Menethil, paladin of the Light, and Lady Jaina Proudmoore, mage. They'd see it through together-whatever it took.
CHAPTER TEN
By mid-morning the next day, they were starting to come across scattered farmsteads. "The village isn't too far distant," Arthas said, consulting the map. "None of these farms is mentioned here." "Nay," said Falric firmly. There was a degree of familiarity in how he spoke to his prince due to how long the two had known each other. Arthas had come to rely on the man's forthrightness, and Falric had been first on the list of those he wanted to accompany him. Now Falric shook his graying head. "I grew up in this area, sir, and most of these farmers are the independent sort. They bring their produce and livestock in to the villages, sell it, and come home." "Bad blood?" "Not at all, Your Highness. It's just the way things are done." "If that is the relationship," Jaina said, "then if someone fell ill, they might not summon outside aid. These people could be sick." "Jaina raises a good point. Let's go see what we can find out from these farmers," Arthas ordered, clucking to his mount. They approached slowly, giving the farmers time to notice and prepare for them. If they were isolationists and if the plague had indeed cut a swathe through here, the farmers would be wary of large parties sweeping down on them. Arthas's eyes scanned the area as they approached the farmhouse. "Look," he said, pointing. "The gate's been smashed and the livestock is gone." "That's not a good sign," Jaina muttered. "Nor has anyone come out to greet us," Falric said. "Or even to challenge us." Arthas and Jaina exchanged glances. Arthas signaled the group to halt. "Greetings to you all!" he said in a strong voice. "I am Arthas, prince of Lordaeron, and my men and I mean you no harm. Please, come out and speak with us-we have questions concerning your safety." Silence. The wind picked up, flattening the acres of grass that should
have been grazing ground for cattle or sheep. The only sound was its soft sigh and the creaking of their own armor as they all shifted uneasily. "No one's here," Arthas said. "Or maybe they're too sick to come out," Jaina replied. "Arthas, we must at least go and see. They could need our help!" Arthas glanced at his men. They looked none too keen on walking into a house that might be infested with plague victims, nor in truth was he. But Jaina was right. These were his people. He had vowed to help them. And so he would, wherever that promise led, whatever it took. "Come on," he said, and swung down. Beside him Jaina did the same. "No, you stay here." Her golden brows drew together in a frown. "I told you, I'm not a fragile little figurine, Arthas. I was sent to investigate the plague, and if there are indeed victims here, I need to see them for myself." He sighed and nodded. "All right then." He strode forward to the farmhouse. They were almost at the garden when the wind shifted. The stench was horrific. Jaina covered her mouth and even Arthas struggled not to gag. It was the sickly sweet smell of the slaughterhouse-no, not even that fresh; it was the reek of carrion. One of his men turned and vomited. It was by sheer will that Arthas did not emulate him. The foul odor was coming from inside the house. It was by now obvious what had happened to the inhabitants. Jaina turned to him, pale but resolute. "I have to examine-" Horrible, liquid-sounding cries filled the air along with the stench of death as from inside the farmhouse and behind it things came at them with startling speed. Arthas's hammer suddenly began to glow with a light so bright he had to narrow his eyes against it. He whirled, lifting the hammer, and stared straight into the eye sockets of a walking nightmare. It wore a rough shirt and overalls, and its weapon was a pitchfork. Once, it had been a farmer. But that had been back when it had been alive. It was obviously dead now, the gray-green flesh sloughing off its skeleton, its rotting fingers leaving smudged bits on the pitchfork handle. Black, congealed fluids oozed from pustules and its gurgling roar spat flecks of ichor on Arthas's unprotected face. So shocked was he by the apparition that he barely had time to swing the hammer before it jabbed him with the pitchfork. He got his blessed weapon up just in time, knocking the farming
implement from the hands of the walking dead man and bringing the radiant hammer crashing into its torso. The thing went sprawling and did not rise. But others came to take its place. Arthas heard the fwhump and telltale crackling of Jaina's firebolts and then suddenly another smell was added to the sickly miasma-the odor of burning flesh. All around him he heard the sound of weapons clashing, men screaming battle cries, the crackle of flame. One of the corpses stumbled distractedly into the house, its body and clothing ablaze. A few moments later, smoke began to billow from the open door. That was it- "Everyone get out, now!" Arthas cried. "Jaina! Burn the farmhouse! Burn it to the ground!" Despite the horror and panic that was racing through his men-trained soldiers, all of them, but not trained for this-his orders were heard. The men turned and ran from the house. Arthas looked over at Jaina. Her mouth was set in a grim line, her eyes were fastened on the house, and fire crackled as comfortably in her small hands as if the flames were innocuous as flowers. A huge fireball as big as a man exploded into the house. It burst into flame and Arthas lifted his hand to shield his face from the blast. Several of the animated corpses had been trapped inside. For a moment Arthas stared at the conflagration, unable to tear his eyes from it, then he forced himself to turn his attention to slaughtering those that had not been caught in the pyre. It was the work of a few more moments, and then all the things were dead. Really dead this time. For a long moment, there was silence except for the crackling sound of flames consuming the burning house. With a slow sigh, the building collapsed. Arthas was glad he could not see the corpses as they were turned to ash. He caught his breath and turned to Jaina. "What..." She swallowed hard. Her face was black with soot, save where streams of sweat had cleared a path. "They-they are called undead." "Light preserve us," Falric muttered, his eyes bulging and his face pale. "I'd thought things like this were just stories to scare children." "No, they're real enough all right. I just-I've never seen one. Never expected to. The, ah..." She took a deep breath and calmed herself, getting her voice under control. "The dead sometimes do linger on, if their deaths were traumatic. It's what gave rise to ghost stories." Her demeanor was calming after the horror. Arthas noticed his men
turning to listen to her, eager for some understanding of what the hell had just happened to them. He, too, was more grateful for her book learning than he could ever recall being before. "The...the animation of corpses by powerful individual necromancers is not unheard of. We saw examples of this in both the First War, when the orcs were able to animate skeletal remains, and in the Second, with the appearance of what would come to be known as death knights," Jaina went on, as if she were reciting a passage rather than trying to explain a horror that the mind could barely grasp. "But as I say-I've never seen any of them before." "Well, they're really dead now," one of the men said. Arthas gave him an encouraging smile. "We have your swords, the Light, and the Lady Jaina's fire to thank for that," he told them. "Arthas," Jaina said. "A moment?" They walked away a little bit while the men began to clean themselves up and recover from the unnerving encounter. "I think I know what you're going to say," Arthas began. "You were sent here to see if this plague was magical in nature. And it's starting to look like it is. Necromantic magic." Jaina nodded wordlessly. Arthas glanced over at his men. "We haven't even hit the main villages yet. I have a feeling we're going to see more of these...undead." Jaina grimaced. "I have a feeling you're right." As they departed the cluster of farmsteads, Jaina drew her horse up and paused. "What are you looking at?" Arthas stepped beside her. Jaina pointed. He followed her gaze, to see a silo standing alone on a hill. "The granary?" She shook her head. "No...the land around it." She dismounted, knelt and touched the soil, scooping up a handful of dry dirt and dead grass. She examined it, poking at a small insect, its six legs curled up in death, then sifted the dirt through her fingers as the slight wind took the powdery soil and bore it away in a little puff of dust. "It's as if the land around that granary is...dying." Arthas glanced from her hand to the earth. She was completely right, he realized. Several yards behind him, the grass was green and healthy, the soil presumably still rich and fertile. But beneath his feet and in the area around the granary, it was as dead as if it were the middle of winter. No-that wasn't a good analogy-winter was when the land slept. There was still life in it,
dormant, but ready to be awakened when spring came. There was no life here. He stared at the granary, sea-green eyes narrowing. "What could have caused this?" "I'm not sure. It reminds me of what happened with the Dark Portal and the Blasted Lands. When the portal was opened, the demonic energies that sapped the life from Draenor spilled through into Azeroth. And the land around the portal-" "...died," Arthas finished. A thought struck him. "Jaina-could the grain itself be plagued? Carrying this-this demonic energy?" Her eyes widened. "Let's hope not." She pointed at the crates the men were hauling out of the granary. "Those crates bear the regional seal of Andorhal, the distribution center for the northern boroughs. If this grain can spread the plague, there's no telling how many villages might be infected." She almost whispered the words, looking wan and sick. He stared at her hands, pale with the dust of the dead land. Fear suddenly shot through Arthas and he grabbed her hand. Closing his eyes, he murmured a prayer. Warm light filled him, spread from his hand to hers. Jaina glanced at him, confused, then down at her own hand clasped in his gloved one. Her eyes widened with horror at what she only now realized could have been a very narrow escape. "Thank you," she whispered. He gave her a shaky grin, then called out to his men, "Gloves! Every man here wears gloves in this area! No exceptions!" His captain heard him and nodded, repeating the order. Most of the men were in full armor, and so were already wearing gauntlets. Arthas shook his head, dispelling the worry that still clung to him. He had sensed no sickness in Jaina at all. Thank the Light. He pressed her hand to his lips. Jaina, moved, blushed and smiled softly. "That was foolish of me. I wasn't thinking." "Lucky for you I was." "A reversal of our roles," she said wryly, offering him a grin and kiss to take the sting out of the gibe.
 
Their mission was now clear-to find and destroy any infected granaries they could. Their task was aided the following day when Arthas's troops crossed
paths with a pair of quel'dorei priests. They, too, had begun to sense the wrongness that was starting to creep through the land, and had come to offer what healing they could. They offered more tangible help as well-they were able to direct Arthas toward a warehouse at the far end of the village they were approaching. "There are some houses up ahead, sir," Falric said. "Well, then," Arthas said, "let's- A sudden boom took him completely by surprise and his horse reared, spooked. "What the-?" He looked in the direction from which the sounds had come. Small shapes, barely visible, but there was no mistaking the noise. "That's mortar fire. Come on!" He regained control of his horse, yanked its head around and galloped toward the sound. Several dwarves looked up as they approached, as surprised to see Arthas as he was to see them. He wheeled to a halt. "What the hell are you shooting at?" "We're blasting those damned skeletons. This whole flaming village is crawling with them!" A chill ran up Arthas's spine. He could see them now, the by-now-toofamiliar figures of undead shuffling with their unmistakable gait closing the distance. "Fire!" cried the leader of the dwarves, and several skeletons were blown into bones that flew in several directions. "Well, I could use your help," Arthas said. "We've got a warehouse to destroy at the end of town." The dwarf turned to him, brown eyes wide. "A warehouse?" he echoed in disbelief. "We're being set upon by tha walkin' dead and ye're fretting about a warehouse?" Arthas had no time for this. "What's in the warehouse is killing these people," he snapped, pointing at the remains of the skeletons. "And when they die..." The dwarf's eyes widened. "Och, I ken ye now. Lads! Move up. We're tae be helping this bonny boy's troops!" He peered up at Arthas. "By the way, who exactly are ye, bonny boy?" Even in the midst of the horror, the offhanded nature of the question made Arthas grin. "Prince Arthas Menethil. And you are?" The dwarf gaped for just an instant, then quickly recovered. "Dargal, at yer service, Yer Highness." Arthas did not waste further breath on pleasantries, instead attempting to
calm his steed sufficiently to keep up with the now-moving unit. The horse was a charger, bred for battle, and while it had not given him a moment's trouble while he was fighting orcs, it clearly did not like the scent of the undead in its nostrils. He couldn't blame it, but its skittishness made him think of Invincible's great heart and utter lack of fear. He forced the thought away; it was a distraction. He needed to focus, not mourn a beast even more surely dead than the lumbering corpses that were being blown to bits. Jaina and his men fell in behind him, catching those who weren't quite destroyed by mortar fire and those who stumbled in from the sides and behind him. Energy filled him, flowed through him, as he swung his hammer tirelessly. He was grateful for Dargal's timely arrival. There were so very many of these undead things, he was not sure his troops could handle them all. The combined units of humans and dwarves made slow but inexorable progression toward the granary. The undead came more thickly as they approached, and by the time they saw silos looming in the distance, there were still more. He leaped from his unhappy mount and charged into their midst, gripping his hammer that glowed with the power of the Light. Now that the initial shock and horror had passed, Arthas found that slaughtering these monstrosities was even better than killing orcs. Maybe the orcs, as Jaina had said, were indeed people-were individuals. These things were nothing more than corpses, jerking around like marionettes, activated by some twisted necromantic puppeteer. They fell like puppets with the strings cut too and he smiled fiercely as two undead toppled from the same broad, sweeping blow of the mighty weapon. These had been dead longer, it seemed; the stench around them was not so ripe, and the bodies were almost more mummified than decaying. Several of them, like those of the first wave, were nothing more than skeletons, bits of clothing or makeshift armor on their bony frames as they rattled toward Arthas and his men. The acrid odor of burning flesh assaulted his nostrils and he grinned, grateful again for Jaina's presence, and he still fought on. He glanced about, panting. Thus far he had lost not a single man, and Jaina, though pale with exertion, was unharmed. "Arthas!" Jaina's voice, strong and clear, pierced through the din. Arthas dispatched the carcass that was attempting to decapitate him with a scythe and in the brief pause that afforded him glanced at her. She was pointing up
ahead, preparatory fire already glowing in her palms and limning her fingers. "Look!" He turned his gaze to where she was pointing and his eyes narrowed. Up ahead was a cluster of humans-obviously living humans judging by their movements-clad in black. They were gesturing-casting, or pointing- clearly directing the movements of the waves of undead that were being hurled at them now. "Over there! Target them!" Arthas cried. The cannons were swung around and his men charged, hacking their way through the undead, their eyes fixed upon the living men in black robes. We've got you now, Arthas thought with savage delight. But as soon as they came under fire directly, the men ceased their activities. The undead they had been controlling suddenly halted, still animated, but no longer directed. They were easy marks for the dwarven mortar fire and Arthas's men, who cut them down with single blows and pushed forward. The magi gathered together and a few of them began casting, their hands fluttering, and Arthas recognized the familiar image of whirling space that indicated they were attempting to create a portal. "No! Don't let them escape!" he cried, slamming his hammer into the chest of a skeleton, bringing it back around in an arc to cave in the head of a shuffling zombie. From the Light only knew where, the wizards summoned more of the walking dead-skeletons, rotting corpses, and something that was huge and pale and had altogether too many limbs. Across its maggotywhite, glistening torso it sported stitches as wide as Arthas's hand, looking like a disturbed child's idea of a rag doll. It towered above the others, ghastly weapons clutched in its three hands, and fixed Arthas with a single working eye. Jaina had somehow appeared by his side and cried, "By the Light-that creature looks like it was sewn together from different corpses!" "Let's study it after we kill it, okay?" Arthas shot back, and charged. The abominable experiment approached, uttering guttural noises and swinging an axe as big as Arthas was tall. He leaped out of the way, rolling and springing lightly back up on his feet to charge the monstrosity from behind. Three of his men, two with polearms, did the same, and the hideous thing was quickly dispatched. Even as he battled fiercely, he watched the magi out of the corner of his eye as they turned and rushed through their portal. And then they were gone. The undead they had abandoned all stopped in their tracks, undirected
corpses that were quickly destroyed. "Dammit!" Arthas cried. A hand fell on his arm and he jerked it back, his features softening slightly as he saw it was Jaina. He wasn't in the mood for comforting or explanations, and he had to do something, anything, to compensate for the men in black robes vanishing on him. "Destroy that warehouse, now!" "Aye, Yer Highness! Let's go lads!" The dwarves surged forward, as eager as he to seize some kind of victory. The cannons rolled over the dead men and the dead soil, until they were within range. "Fire!" Dargal cried. As one, the cannons roared, and Arthas felt a hot surge of pleasure as the granary crumbled beneath the assault. "Jaina! Burn what's left of it!" She was already lifting her hands before he started speaking; they did work well together, he thought. An enormous ball of crackling flame sprang from her hands, and the granary and its contents ignited immediately. They waited, watching it burn, so that the fire did not spread. With the land so desiccated, a fire could quickly get out of control. Arthas ran a hand through his sweat-stiff blond hair. The heat coming off the burning granary was oppressive and he yearned for a breeze. He walked away a short distance, and prodded the fallen pale thing with a plated boot. His foot sank into the soft flesh and he wrinkled his nose. Jaina followed him. Upon closer examination, it looked like she had been right-that the thing was indeed cobbled together out of other body parts. Arthas suppressed a shudder. "The magi-dressed in black..." "I-I'm afraid they were necromancers," Jaina said. "Just like we discussed earlier." "What noo?" Dargal had come up behind them and was eyeing the fallen abomination with disgust on his face. "Necromancers. Magi who have dabbled in dark magic-who can raise and control the dead. Obviously, they and whomever they serve are behind this plague." She lifted her serious blue eyes to Arthas. "Demonic energy may be involved, but I think it's clear that we started down the wrong path." "Necromancers...creating a plague to get more raw material for their unholy army," Arthas murmured, glancing back toward the now-smoking ruins of the granary. "I want them. No-no, I want their leader." His gauntleted fists clenched. "I want that bastard who is deliberately slaughtering my people!" He thought about the crates they had seen earlier,
and the seal they bore. He lifted his eyes and looked down the road. "And it's a good bet that we'll find him, and the answers we're looking for, in Andorhal."
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Arthas was pushing his men too hard and he knew it, but time was a precious resource and could not be squandered. He felt a tug of guilt when he saw Jaina chewing on some dried meat as they rode. The Light refreshed him when he worked with it; magi drew on different energies, and he knew that Jaina was exhausted after the superb effort she had put forth earlier. But there was no time for rest, not when thousands of lives depended upon their actions. He'd been sent on a mission to find out what was going on and stop it. The mystery was starting to unravel, but he was beginning to doubt his ability to halt the plague. Nothing was as easy as it had looked at first. Still, Arthas would not give up. Could not give up. He had vowed to do whatever it took to stop this, to save his people, and so he would. They saw and smelled the smoke rising in the sky before they reached the gates of Andorhal. Arthas hoped that if the town had burned, then maybe at least the grain had been destroyed as well, and then felt a twinge of guilt at the callousness of the thought. He buried it in action, kicking his mount hard and riding through the gates, expecting to be assaulted at any moment. Around them buildings burned, black smoke stinging his eyes and making him cough. Through tear-filled eyes he peered around. There were no villagers, but neither were there any undead. What was- "I believe you have come looking for me, children," came a smooth voice. The wind shifted, driving the smoke in a different direction, and Arthas could now see a black-robed figure standing only a short distance away. Arthas tensed. This, then, was the leader. The necromancer was smiling now, his face dimly glimpsed in the shadow of his hood, a smirk that Arthas burned to cut off his face. Beside him were two of his pet undead. "You've found me. I am Kel'Thuzad." Jaina gasped in recognition at the name, and her hand flew to her mouth. Arthas spared her a quick glance, then returned his full attention to the speaker. He gripped his hammer tightly.
"I've come to deliver a warning," said the necromancer. "Leave well enough alone. Your curiosity will be the death of you." "I thought this magic taint felt familiar!" It was Jaina, her voice shaking with outrage. "You were disgraced, Kel'Thuzad, precisely for your experiments along this line! We told you it would lead to disaster. And you have learned nothing!" "Lady Jaina Proudmoore," Kel'Thuzad purred. "Looks like Antonidas's little apprentice is all grown up. And quite the contrary my dear...as you can see, I have learned a great deal." "I saw the rats you experimented with!" Jaina cried. "That was bad enough-but now you-" "Have furthered my research and perfected it," Kel'Thuzad answered. "Are you responsible for this plague, necromancer?" Arthas shouted. "Is this cult your doing?" Kel'Thuzad turned to him, his eyes glittering in the shadow of his cowl. "I ordered the Cult of the Damned to distribute the plagued grain. But the sole credit is not mine." Before Arthas could speak, Jaina had burst out, "What do you mean?" "I serve the dreadlord Mal'Ganis. He commands the Scourge that will cleanse this land and establish a paradise of eternal darkness!" A chill swept over Arthas despite the heat of the surrounding fires at the tone of the man's voice. He did not know what a "dreadlord" was, but the meaning of "Scourge" was clear. "And what exactly is this Scourge meant to cleanse?" The thin-lipped mouth beneath the white mustache again curled in a cruel smile. "Why, the living, of course. His plan is already in motion. Seek him out at Stratholme if you need further proof." Arthas had had enough of teasing hints and taunts. He growled, gripped the haft of his hammer, and charged forward. "For the Light!" he cried. Kel'Thuzad had not moved. He stood his ground, then, at the last minute, the air around him twisted and puckered, and he was gone. The two creatures who had stood silently at his sides now clamped their arms on Arthas, trying to wrestle him down to the earth, their fetid stench vying with the smell of smoke to choke him. He twisted free, landing a strong, clean blow to the head of one of them. Its skull shattered like a fragile piece of blown glass, brains spattering the earth as it collapsed. The second was as easily dealt with. "The granary!" he cried, running to his horse and leaping atop it. "Come
on!" The others mounted up and they charged down the main path through the burning village. The granaries loomed up ahead of them. They were untouched by the fire that seemed to be racing through the rest of Andorhal. Arthas drew his horse up sharply and leaped off it, running as fast as he could toward the buildings. He pulled open the door, hoping desperately to see crates piled high. Grief and rage swept through him as the only thing to meet his gaze were empty chambers-empty save for small, scattered bits of grain and the corpses of rats on the floor. He stared, sick, for a moment, then raced to the next one, and the next, yanking the doors open even though he knew exactly what he would find. They were all empty. And had been for some time, if the layers of dust on the floor and the spiderwebs in the corners were any indication. "The shipments have already been sent out," he said brokenly as Jaina stepped up beside him. "We're too late!" He slammed his gauntleted fist into the wooden door and Jaina jumped. "Dammit!" "Arthas, we did the best we-" He whirled on her furiously. "I'm going to find him. I'm going to find that undead-loving bastard and rip him limb from limb for this! Let him get someone to sew him back together." He stormed out, shaking. He'd failed. He'd had the man right there and he'd failed. The grain had been sent out, and Light alone knew how many people would die because of that. Because of him. No. He was not going to let that happen. He would protect his people. He would die to protect them. Arthas clenched his fists. "North," he said to the men who trailed behind him, unaccustomed to seeing their generally good-natured prince in the grip of such fury. "That's the next place he'll go. Let's exterminate him like the vermin he is." He rode like a man possessed, galloping north, almost absently slaughtering the shambling wrecks of human beings who attempted to stop him. He was no longer moved by the horror of it all; his mind's eye was filled with the vision of the man manipulating it and the disgusting cult that perpetrated it. The dead would rest soon enough; Arthas had to ensure that no more would be made. At one point there was a huge cluster of the undead. Rotting heads lifted as one, turning toward Arthas and his men, and they moved toward him.
Arthas cried out, "For the Light!", kicked his steed, and charged in among them, swinging his hammer and crying out incoherently, venting his anger and frustration on these, the perfect targets. At one point, there was a lull, and he was able to look around. Safe and secure away from the field of battle, overseeing everything while risking nothing, stood a tall figure in a fluttering black cloak. As if waiting for them. Kel'Thuzad. "There!" he cried. "He's there!" Jaina and his men followed him, Jaina blasting clear passage with fireball after fireball, and his men hacking the undead that did not fall in the first round of attacks. Arthas felt righteous fury singing in his veins as he drew closer and closer to the necromancer. His hammer rose and fell, seemingly effortlessly, and he didn't even see those he struck down. His eyes were fixed on the man-if you could even call such a monster that-responsible for everything in the first place. Cut off the head, and the beast would die. Then Arthas was there. A bellow of raw fury exploded from him and he swung, sweeping his brilliantly glowing hammer parallel to the ground, striking Kel'Thuzad at the knees and sending him flying. Others pressed in, swords slicing and hacking, the men venting their grief and outrage on the source, the cause, of the entire disaster. For all his power and magic, it seemed as though Kel'Thuzad could indeed die like any other man. Both legs were shattered by Arthas's sweeping blow and lay at odd angles. His robes were wet with blood, shiny black against a matte black, and red trickled from his mouth. He propped himself up on his arms and tried to speak, spitting out blood and teeth. He tried again. "Naïve...fool," he managed, swallowing. "My death will make little difference in the long run...for now...the scourging of this land...begins." His elbows buckled and, eyes closing, he fell. The body began to rot immediately. Decomposition that should have taken days happened in mere seconds, the flesh paling, bloating, bursting open. The men gasped and started back, covering their noses and mouths. Some of them turned and vomited from the stench. Arthas stared, horrified and enraptured at the same time, unable to look away. Fluids gushed from the corpse, the flesh taking on a creamy consistency and turning black. The unnatural decomposition slowed and Arthas turned away, gasping for fresh air.
Jaina was deathly pale with dark circles around her wide, shocked eyes. Arthas went to her and turned her away from the disgusting image. "What happened to him?" he asked quietly. Jaina swallowed, trying to calm herself. Again, she seemed to find strength in her detachment. "It is believed that, ah, if necromancers are not perfectly precise in their magical workings that, um...if they are killed they are subject to..." Her voice trailed off and suddenly she was a young woman, looking sickened and shocked. "That." "Come on," Arthas said gently. "Let's get to Hearthglen. They need to be warned-if we're not too late already." They left the body where it had fallen, not granting it another glance. Arthas said a silent prayer to the Light that they were not too late. He did not know what he would do if he failed again.
 
Jaina was exhausted. She knew that Arthas wanted to make the best time possible, and she shared his concern. Lives were at stake. So when he asked her if she could go through the night without stopping, she nodded. They had been riding hard for four hours when she found herself half off her mount. She was so bone-weary she'd fallen unconscious for a few seconds. Fear shot through her and she grabbed onto the horse's mane wildly, pulling herself back up into the saddle and yanking on the reins so the horse would stop. She sat there, the reins clutched in her hands, trembling, for several minutes before Arthas realized she'd fallen behind. Dimly she heard him calling a halt. She looked up at him mutely as he cantered up to her. "Jaina, what's wrong?" "I...I'm sorry Arthas. I know you want to make good time and so do I, but-I was so tired I almost fell off. Could we stop, for just a little while?" She saw the concern for her and frustration at the situation warring on his face, even in the dim light. "How long do you think you'll need?" A couple of days, she wanted to say, but instead she said, "Just long enough to eat something and rest for a bit." He nodded, reaching up to her and helping her off the horse. He bore her to the side of the road, where he set her down gently. Jaina fished in her pack for some cheese with hands that trembled. She expected him to head off and talk to the men, but instead he sat down beside her. Impatience radiated from
him like heat from a fire. She took a bite of cheese and looked up at him as she chewed, analyzing his profile in the starlight. One of the things she most loved about Arthas was how accessible, how human and emotional, he was to her. But now, while he was certainly in the grip of powerful emotions, he felt distant, as if he was a hundred miles away. Impulsively she reached a hand to touch his face. He started at her touch, as if he had forgotten she was there, then smiled thinly at her. "Done?" he asked. Jaina thought about the single bite she had eaten. "No," she said, "but... Arthas, I'm worried about you. I don't like what this is doing to you." "Doing to me?" he snapped. "What about what it's doing to the villagers? They're dying and then getting turned into corpses, Jaina. I have to stop it, I have to!" "Of course we do, and I'll do everything I can to help; you know that. But...I've never seen you hate anything like this." He laughed, a short harsh bark. "You want me to love necromancers?" She frowned. "Arthas, don't twist my words like that. You're a paladin. A servant of the Light. You're a healer as much as a warrior, but all I see in you is this desire to wipe out the enemy." "You're starting to sound like Uther." Jaina didn't reply. She was so weary, it was difficult to compose her thoughts. She took another bite of cheese, focusing on getting the badly needed nourishment into her body. For some reason it was hard for her to swallow. "Jaina...I just want innocent people to stop dying. That's all. And...I admit, I'm upset that I can't seem to make that happen. But once this is over, you'll see. Everything will be fine again. I promise." He smiled down at her, and for a moment she saw the old Arthas in his handsome face. She smiled back in what she hoped was a reassuring fashion. "Are you done now?" Two bites. Jaina put the rest of the cheese away. "Yes, I'm done. Let's keep going."
 
The sky was turning from black to the ashy gray of dawn when they first heard the gunfire. Arthas's heart sank. He spurred his horse as they wound
their way north up the long road that cut through the deceptively pleasant hills. Just outside the gates of Hearthglen, they saw several men and dwarves armed with rifles-all trained on them. Wafted to him on the light breeze, mixed in with the smell of gunpowder, was the incongruously pleasant, slightly sweet scent of baking bread. "Hold your fire!" Arthas cried as his troops galloped up. He drew rein so hard his mount reared in startlement. "I am Prince Arthas! What's going on? Why are you so armed?" They lowered their rifles, clearly surprised to see their prince standing right in front of them. "Sir, you won't believe what's been going on." "Try me," Arthas said. Arthas was not surprised to hear the initial words-that the dead had risen and were attacking. What did surprise him was the term "vast army." He glanced at Jaina. She looked utterly exhausted. The little break they had taken last night obviously hadn't been sufficient to restore her. "Sir," cried one of the scouts, rushing in, "the army-it's heading this way!" "Dammit," Arthas muttered. This small group of men and dwarves could handle a skirmish well enough, but not a whole damned army of the things. He made a decision. "Jaina, I'll stay here to protect the village. Go as quickly as you can and tell Lord Uther what's happened." "But-" "Go, Jaina! Every second counts!" She nodded. Light bless her and that level head of hers. He spared her a smile of gratitude before she stepped through the portal she created and disappeared. "Sir," said Falric, and something in the tone of his voice made Arthas turn. "You'd...better take a look at this." Arthas followed the man's gaze and his heart sank. Empty crates... bearing the mark of Andorhal... Hoping against hope that he was wrong, Arthas asked in a voice that shook slightly, "What did those crates contain?" One of the Hearthglen men looked at him, puzzled. "Just a grain shipment from Andorhal. There's no need to worry, milord. It's already been distributed among the villagers. We've had plenty of bread." That was the smell-not the typical smell of baking bread, but slightly off, slightly too sweet-and then Arthas understood. He staggered, just a
little, as the enormity of the situation, the true scope of its horror, burst over him. The grain had been distributed...and suddenly there was a vast army of the undead.... "Oh, no," he whispered. They stared at him and he tried again to speak, his voice still shaking. But this time, not with horror, but with fury. The plague was never meant to simply kill his people. No, no, it was much darker, much more twisted than that. It was meant to turn them into- Even as the thought formed, the man who had answered Arthas's question about the crate bent over double. Several others followed suit. A strange green glow limned their bodies, pulsing and growing stronger. They clutched their stomachs and fell to the earth, blood erupting from their mouths, saturating their shirts. One of them stretched out a hand to him, imploring for healing. Instead, Arthas, repulsed, recoiled in horror, staring as the man writhed in pain and died in a matter of seconds. What had he done? The man had begged for healing, but Arthas had not even lifted a hand. But could this even be healed, Arthas wondered as he stared at the corpse. Could the Light even- "Merciful Light!" Falric cried. "The bread-" Arthas started at the shout, coming out of his guilty trance. Bread-the staff of life-wholesome and nourishing-had now become worse than lethal. Arthas opened his mouth to cry out, to warn his men, but his tongue was like clay in his mouth. The plague embedded into the grain acted even before the shocked prince could find words. The dead man's eyes opened. He lurched upright into a seated position. And that was how Kel'Thuzad had created an undead army in so astonishingly short a time. Insane laughter echoed in his ears-Kel'Thuzad, laughing maniacally, triumphant even in death. Arthas wondered if he was going mad from all he had been forced to bear witness to. The undead clambered to their feet, and their movement galvanized him to action and liberated his tongue. "Defend yourselves!" Arthas cried, swinging his hammer before the man had a chance to rise. Others were swifter, though, getting to dead feet, turning the weapons that in life they would have used to protect Arthas upon him. The only advantage he had was that the undead were not graceful with their weapons, and most of the shots they fired went wide. Arthas's men, meanwhile, attacked with hard eyes and grim faces, bashing skulls,
decapitating, smashing what had been allies just a few moments earlier into submission. "Prince Arthas, the undead forces have arrived!" Arthas whirled, his armor spattered with gore, and his eyes widened slightly. So many. There were so many of them, skeletons who had been long dead, fresh corpses recently turned, more of the pale, maggoty abominations thundering down on them. He could sense the panic. They had fought handfuls, but not this-not an army of the walking dead. Arthas thrust his hammer into the air. It flared to glowing life. "Hold your ground!" he cried, his voice no longer weak and shaking or harsh and angry. "We are the chosen of the Light! We shall not fall!" The Light bathing his determined features, he charged.
 
Jaina was more exhausted than she had admitted even to herself. Drained after the days of fighting with little or no rest, she collapsed after finishing the teleportation spell. She thought she blacked out for a moment, because the next thing she knew her master was bending over her, lifting her off the floor. "Jaina-child, what is it?" "Uther," Jaina managed. "Arthas-Hearthglen-" She reached up and clutched Antonidas's robes. "Necromancers-Kel'Thuzad-raising the dead to fight-" Antonidas's eyes widened. Jaina gulped and continued. "Arthas and his men are fighting in Hearthglen alone. He needs reinforcements immediately!" "I think Uther is at the palace," Antonidas said. "I'll send several magi there right away to open portals for as many men as he needs to bring. You did well, my dear. I'm very proud of you. Now, you get some rest." "No!" Jaina cried. She struggled to her feet, barely able to stand, forcing the exhaustion back by sheer will alone, holding out a shaking hand to keep Antonidas back. "I have to be with him. I'll be all right. Come on!"
 
Arthas had no idea how long he had been fighting. He swung his hammer almost ceaselessly, his arms shaking from the strain, his lungs burning. It was only the power of the Light, flowing through him with quiet strength and
steadiness, that kept him and his men on their feet. The undead seemed to be weakened by its power, although that seemed to be their only weakness. Only a clean kill-Arthas fleetingly wondered if you could call it a "kill" if they were already dead-stopped them in their tracks. They just kept coming. Wave after wave of them. His subjects-his people-turned into these things. He lifted his weary arms for another blow when over the din of battle came a voice Arthas knew: "For Lordaeron! For the king!" The men rallied at Uther the Lightbringer's impassioned shout, renewing their attacks. Uther had come with a solid core of knights, fresh and battlehardened. They did not shirk from the undead-Jaina, who despite her boneweariness had also portaled in with Uther and the knights, had apparently briefed them sufficiently so that precious seconds were not wasted in stunned reaction. The undead fell more quickly now, and each wave was met with fierce and impassioned attacks from hammer, sword, and flame.
 
Jaina sank down, her legs giving way beneath her, as the last of the walking dead burst into flames, stumbled about, and fell, dead in truth. She reached for a waterskin and drank deeply, shaking, and fished out some dried meat to gnaw on. The fight was over-for the moment. Arthas and Uther had both removed their helms. Sweat matted their hair. She chewed on the meat and watched as Uther looked out over the sea of undead corpses and nodded his satisfaction. Arthas was staring at something, his expression stricken. Jaina followed his gaze and frowned, not understanding. Corpses were everywhere -but Arthas was looking almost as if in a daze at the bloated, fly-riddled body of not one of his soldiers, or even a man, but of a horse. Uther walked up to his student and clapped Arthas on the shoulder. "I'm surprised that you kept things together as long as you did, lad." His voice was warm with pride and a smile was on his lips. "If I hadn't arrived just then-" Arthas whirled. "Look, I did the best I could, Uther!" Both Uther and Jaina blinked at the harsh tone of voice. He was overreacting-Uther wasn't censuring him; he was praising him. "If I'd had a legion of knights riding at my back, I would've-" Uther's eyes narrowed. "Now is not the time to be choking on pride! From what Jaina has told me, what we faced here was only the beginning."
Arthas's sea-green eyes darted to Jaina. He was still smarting from the perceived insult and for the first time since Jaina had met him, she found herself shrinking a little from that piercing gaze. "Or did you not notice that the undead ranks are bolstered every time one of our warriors falls in battle?" Uther persisted. "Then we should strike at their leader!" Arthas snapped. "Kel'Thuzad told me who it was and where to find him. It's-something called a dreadlord. His name is Mal'Ganis. And he's in Stratholme. Stratholme, Uther. The very place where you were made a paladin of the Light. Doesn't that mean anything to you?" Uther sighed wearily. "Of course it does, but-" "I'll go there and kill Mal'Ganis myself if I have to!" Arthas cried. Jaina stopped chewing and stared at him. She had never seen him like this. "Easy, lad. Brave as you are, you can't hope to defeat a man who commands the dead all by yourself." "Then feel free to tag along, Uther. I'm going, with or without you." Before either Uther or Jaina could protest further, he'd leaped into the saddle, yanked his steed's head around, and headed south. Jaina got to her feet, stunned. He'd left without Uther-without his men...without her. Uther quietly stepped beside her. She shook her fair head. "He feels personally responsible for all the deaths," she told the older paladin quietly. "He thinks he should have been able to stop this." She looked up at Uther. "Not even the magi of Dalaran-the ones who warned Kel'Thuzad in the first place-suspected what was going on. Arthas couldn't possibly have known." "He's feeling the weight of the crown for the first time," Uther said quietly. "He's never had to before. This is all part of it, my lady-part of learning how to rule wisely and well. I watched Terenas struggle with the same thing, when he was a young man. Both good men, both wanting to do the right things for their people. To keep them safe and happy." His eyes were thoughtful as he watched Arthas fade into the distance. "But sometimes the only decision is which is the lesser evil. Sometimes there's no way to fix everything. Arthas is learning that." "I think I understand but-I can't let him just charge off by himself." "No, no, once I get the men ready for a long march, we'll be on his trail. You should rest up too." Jaina shook her head. "No. He shouldn't be alone."
"Lady Proudmoore, if I may," Uther said slowly. "It might be good to let him clear his head. Follow him if you must, but give him a little time to think." His meaning was obvious. She didn't like it, but she agreed with him. Arthas was distraught. He was feeling angry and impotent and wasn't in a state to be reasoned with. And it was precisely for those reasons she couldn't let him be really alone. "All right," she said. She mounted up and murmured the spell. She saw Uther grin as he suddenly realized he could no longer see her. "I'll follow him. Come as soon as your men are ready." She would not follow him too closely. She was invisible, but not silent. Jaina squeezed her horse with her knees into a canter to pursue the bright, brooding prince of Lordaeron.
 
Arthas kicked the horse hard, angry that it was not going faster, angry that it was not Invincible, angry that he had not figured out what was going on in time to stop it. It was almost overwhelming. His father had had to deal with orcs-creatures from another world, flooding into their own, brutal and violent and bent on conquest. That seemed like child's play to Arthas now. How would his father and the Alliance have fared against this-a plague that not only killed people, but in a sick twist that only a deranged mind would find amusing animated their corpses to fight their own friends and families? Would Terenas have done any better? One moment Arthas thought he would have-that Terenas would have figured out the puzzle in time to stop it, to save the innocent-and the next he rationalized that no one could have done so. Terenas would have been as helpless as he in the face of this horror. So deep in thought was he that he almost didn't see the man standing in the road, and it was with a sharp, startled yank that he pulled his mount to the side just in time. Chagrined, worried, and furious at being made so, Arthas snapped, "Fool! What are you doing? I could have run you down!" The man was unlike any Arthas had ever seen before, and yet he struck the youth as somewhat familiar. Tall, broad-shouldered, he wore a cloak that seemed to be made entirely out of shiny black feathers. His features were shadowed by the cowl, but his eyes were bright as they peered up at Arthas. A beard streaked with gray parted, revealing a white smile.
"You would not have harmed me, and I required your attention," he said, his voice deep and mild. "I spoke to your father, young one. He would not hear me. Now I come to you." He bowed, and Arthas frowned. It seemed to be-mocking. "We must talk." Arthas snorted. Now he knew why this mysterious, dramatically clad stranger seemed so familiar. He was some kind of mystic-a self-styled prophet, Terenas had said; able to transform into a bird. He'd had the gall to come right into Terenas's own throne room, with some kind of doomsday blather. "I have no time for this," Arthas growled, gathering up his horse's reins. "Listen to me, boy." There was no mocking note in the stranger's voice now. His voice cracked like a whip and despite himself Arthas listened. "This land is lost! The shadow has already fallen, and nothing you do will deter it. If you truly wish to save your people, lead them across the sea...to the west." Arthas almost laughed. His father had been right-this was a madman. "Flee? My place is here, and my only course is to defend my people! I will not abandon them to this hideous existence. I will find the one behind this and destroy him. You're a fool if you think otherwise." "A fool, am I? I suppose I am, to think the son would be wiser than the father." The bright eyes looked troubled. "Your choice is already made. You will not be swayed by one who sees farther than you." "I've only your word that you see farther. I know what I see, and what I have seen, and that is that my people need me here!" The prophet smiled now, sadly. "It is not only with our eyes that we see, Prince Arthas. It is with our wisdom and our hearts. I will leave you one final prediction. Just remember, the harder you strive to slay your enemies, the faster you'll deliver your people into their hands." Arthas opened his mouth for a furious retort, but at that instant the stranger's shape shifted. The cloak seemed to close about him like a second skin. Wings, jet black and glossy, sprouted from his body even as he shrank to the size of an ordinary raven. With a final harsh caw that sounded frustrated to Arthas, the bird that had been a man leaped into the air, wheeled once, and flew off. He watched it go, vaguely troubled. The man had seemed...so certain.... "I'm sorry for concealing myself, Arthas." Jaina's voice coming out of nowhere. Startled, Arthas whipped his head around, trying to find her. She materialized in front of him, looking contrite. "I just wanted to-"
"Don't say it!" He saw her start in surprise, saw those blue eyes widen, and instantly regretted snapping at her. But she shouldn't have sneaked up on him like this, spied on him like this. "He came to Antonidas, too," she said after a moment, doggedly continuing with what she had intended to say despite his reprimand. "I-I have to say that I sensed tremendous power about him, Arthas." She rode closer to him, peering up at him. "This plague of the undead-nothing like this has ever been seen before in the history of the world. It's not just another battle, or another war-it's something much bigger and darker than that. And maybe you can't use the same tactics to win. Maybe he's right. Maybe he can see things we can't-maybe he does know what will happen." He turned away from her, grinding his teeth. "Maybe. Or maybe he's some ally of this Mal'Ganis. Or maybe he's just some crazy hermit. Nothing he can say will make me abandon my homeland, Jaina. I don't care if that madman has seen the future. Let's go." They rode in silence for a moment. Then Jaina said quietly, "Uther will be following. He just needed some extra time to prepare the men." Arthas stared straight ahead, still fuming. Jaina tried again. "Arthas, you shouldn't-" "I am sick of people trying to tell me what I should and shouldn't do!" The words burst from him, startling himself as much as Jaina. "What's going on here is beyond horrible, Jaina. I can't even find words to describe it. And I'm doing everything I possibly can. If you're not going to support my decisions then maybe you don't belong here." He eyed her, his expression softening. "You look so tired, Jaina. Maybe...maybe you should go back." She shook her head, staring straight ahead, not meeting his gaze. "You need me here. I can help." The anger bled away from him, and he reached for her hand, closing fingers encased in metal over hers gently. "I shouldn't have spoken to you like that and I'm sorry. I'm glad you're here. I'm always glad of your company." He bent and kissed her hand. Color came to her cheeks and she smiled at him, the furrow in her brow uncreasing. "Dear Arthas," she said softly. He squeezed her hand and let it go. They rode hard the rest of the day, not speaking much, and halted to make camp as the sun was going down. Both of them were too weary to hunt for any fresh meat, so they simply took out some dried meat, apples, and
bread. Arthas stared at the loaf in his hand. From the ovens of the palace, baked with grain grown locally-not from Andorhal. It was wholesome fare, nourishing and delicious, smelling yeasty and good and not sickly sweet. A simple, basic food, something that everyone, anyone, should be able to eat without fear. His throat suddenly closed up and he placed the bread down, unable to eat a bite, and he put his head in his hands. For a moment he felt overwhelmed, as if a tidal wave of despair and helplessness washed over him. Then Jaina was there, kneeling beside him, resting her head on his shoulder while he struggled to compose himself. She said nothing; she did not need to, her simple, supportive presence was all he needed. Then with a deep sigh he turned to her and took her in his arms. She responded, kissing him deeply, needing comfort and reassurance from him as much as he did from her. Arthas ran his hands through her silky golden hair and breathed her scent. And for a few brief hours that night, they permitted themselves to be lost in each other, pushing away thoughts of death and horror and plagued grain and prophets and choices, their world narrow and tender and comprised only of the two of them.
CHAPTER TWELVE
Still half asleep, Jaina awoke and reached out a hand for Arthas. He was not there. Blinking, she sat up. He was already awake and dressed, cooking some sort of hot cereal for them. He smiled when he saw her, but it didn't reach his eyes. Jaina tentatively returned the smile and reached for her robe, slipping it on and combing her hair with her fingers. "There's something I learned," Arthas said without preamble. "Last night -I didn't want to mention it. But you need to know." His voice was flat and Jaina felt something inside her quail. At least he wasn't screaming, like he had been yesterday-but somehow this was worse. He ladled up a bowl of steaming grains and brought it over to her. She spooned it automatically into her mouth as he continued to speak. "This plague-the undead-" He took a deep breath. "We knew that the grain was plagued. We knew that it killed people. But it's worse than that, Jaina. It doesn't just kill them." The words seemed to catch in his throat. Jaina sat there for a moment, as understanding dawned. She thought she'd throw up the grains she'd just eaten. Her breath seemed to come with difficulty. "It...turns them, somehow. It makes them into the undead...doesn't it?" Please tell me I'm wrong, Arthas. He didn't. Instead he nodded his golden head. "That's why there were so many of them so quickly. The grain reached Hearthglen a short time ago- long enough to be milled into flour and baked into bread." Jaina stared at him. The implications of this-she couldn't even wrap her mind around them. "That's why I rushed off yesterday. I knew I couldn't take Mal'Ganis by myself, but-Jaina, I just couldn't sit around and-and mend armor and make camp, you know?" She nodded dumbly. She did understand, now. "And that prophet-I don't care how powerful you think he is. I can't just leave and let all of Lordaeron turn into this-this-Mal'Ganis, whatever, whomever he is, has got to be stopped. We've got to find every last crate of
this plagued grain and destroy it." The telling of this shocking information seemed to agitate Arthas again, and he got to his feet, pacing. "Where the hell is Uther?" he said. "He had all night to ride here." Jaina placed aside the half-eaten cereal, got to her feet, and finished dressing. Her mind was working a thousand miles a minute, trying to comprehend the situation fully and dispassionately, trying to think of some way to combat it. Wordlessly they broke camp and headed for Stratholme. The ashy grayness of dawn only darkened as the clouds closed off the sun. Rain began to fall, chilly and stinging. Both Arthas and Jaina flipped the hoods of their cloaks up, but that did little to keep Jaina dry, and she was shivering by the time they reached the gates of the great city. Almost as they drew rein, Jaina heard sounds behind her and turned to see Uther and his men coming up the dirt road that was now almost pure mud. By this point, Arthas had worked himself up again, and he turned to Uther with a bitter grin. "Glad you could make it, Uther," he snapped. Uther was a patient man, but he lost his temper now. Arthas and Jaina were not the only ones under strain. "Watch your tone with me, boy! You may be the prince, but I'm still your superior as a paladin!" "As if I could forget," Arthas retorted. He moved quickly to the top of a rise, so he could look over the walls and into the city. He didn't know what he was looking for. Signs of life, of normalcy, perhaps. Signs that they'd gotten here in time. Anything to give him hope that he could still somehow do something. "Listen, Uther, there's something about the plague you should know. The grain-" The wind shifted as he spoke, and the scent that reached his nostrils was not an unpleasant one. Nonetheless, Arthas felt as though he'd been punched in the gut. The smell, the strange, unique scent of bread baked with the tainted grain, unmistakable on the air damp with rain. Light, no. Already milled, already baked, already- The blood drained from Arthas's face. His eyes widened, staring starkly in horrified comprehension. "We're too late. We're too damned late! The grain-these people-" He tried again. "These people have all been infected." "Arthas-" Jaina began in a low voice. "They may look fine now, but it's just a matter of time before they turn into the undead!"
"What?" cried Uther. "Lad, have you gone insane?" "No," Jaina said. "He's right. If they've eaten the grain, they're infected -and if they're infected...they'll turn." She was thinking furiously. There had to be something they could do. Antonidas once told her, if a thing is magical in origin, then magic can combat it. If they just had a little time to think, if they could calm down and react from logic and not emotion, perhaps a cure could- "This entire city must be purged." Arthas's statement was blunt and brutal. Jaina blinked. Surely he hadn't meant that. "How can you even consider that?" Uther cried, marching up to his former student. "There's got to be some other way. This isn't a blighted apple crop, this is a city full of human beings!" "Damn it, Uther! We have to do it!" Arthas shoved his face within an inch of Uther's, and for a dreadful moment Jaina was convinced they'd draw weapons on each other. "Arthas, no! We can't do that!" The words left her lips before she could stop them. He whirled on her, his sea-colored eyes now stormy with anger and hurt and despair. She realized immediately that he truly thought this was the only option-the only way to save other, uncorrupted lives was to sacrifice these cursed ones, these that could no longer be salvaged. His face softened slightly as she rushed on, trying to get the words out before he could interrupt her. "Listen to me. We don't know how many people are infected. Some of them might not have eaten any of the grain at all-others might not have eaten a lethal dose. We don't even know what a lethal dose is yet. We know so little-we can't just slaughter them like animals out of our own fear!" It was the wrong thing to say, and she watched as Arthas's face closed up. "I'm trying to protect the innocent, Jaina. That's what I swore to do." "They are innocent-they're victims! They didn't ask for this! Arthas, there are children in there. We don't know if it affects them. There's too much unknown for such a-a drastic solution." "What of those who are infected?" he asked with a sudden, frightening quiet. "They'll kill those children, Jaina. They'll try to kill us...and spread out from here and keep killing. They're going to die regardless, and when they rise, they'll do things that in life they would never, ever have wanted to do. What would you choose, Jaina?"
She hadn't expected that. She looked from Arthas to Uther, then back again. "I-I don't know." "Yes, you do." He was right, and despairingly, she knew it. "Wouldn't you rather die now than die from this plague? Die a clean death as a thinking, living human being rather than be raised as an undead to attack everyone, everything you loved in life?" Her face crumpled. "I...that would be my personal choice, yes. But we can't make that choice for them. Don't you see?" He shook his head. "No. I don't see. We need to purge this city before any of them have a chance to escape and spread the contagion. Before any of them turn. It's a kindness and it's the only solution to stop this plague right here, right now, dead in its tracks. And that is exactly what I intend to do." Tears of anguish burned in Jaina's eyes. "Arthas-give me a little time. Just a day or two. I can teleport back to Antonidas and we can call an emergency meeting. Maybe we can figure out some way to-" "We don't have a day or two!" The words exploded from Arthas. "Jaina, this affects people within hours. Maybe minutes. I-I saw it at Hearthglen. There's no time for deliberation or discussion. We have to act. Now. Or it will be too late." He turned to Uther, dismissing Jaina. "As your future king, I order you to purge this city!" "You're not my king yet, boy! Nor would I obey that command even if you were!" The silence that fell crackled with tension. Arthas...beloved, best friend...please don't do this. "Then I must consider this an act of treason." Arthas's voice was cold, clipped. If he had struck her across the face, Jaina could not have been more shocked. "Treason?" Uther spluttered. "Have you lost your mind, Arthas?" "Have I? Lord Uther, by my right of succession and the sovereignty of my crown, I hereby relieve you of your command and suspend your paladins from service." "Arthas!" Jaina yelped, her tongue freed in her shock. "You can't just-" He whirled on her furiously and spat, "It's done!" She stared at him. He turned to look at his men, who had stood by silent and wary as the argument had progressed. "Those of you who have the will to save this land, follow me! The rest of you...get out of my sight!"
Jaina felt sick and dizzy. He was really going to do this. He was going to march into Stratholme and cut down every living man, woman, and child within its walls. She swayed and clutched the reins of her horse. It lowered its head and whickered at her, blowing warm breath from its soft muzzle across her cheek. She was fiercely envious of its ignorance. She wondered if Uther would attack his former pupil. But he was bound by an oath to serve his prince, even if he had been relieved of command. She saw the tendons on his neck stand out like cords, could almost hear him gritting his teeth. But he did not attack his liege. Loyalty, however, did not still his tongue. "You've just crossed a terrible threshold, Arthas." Arthas looked at him a moment longer, then shrugged. He turned to Jaina, his eyes searching hers, and for a moment-just a moment-he looked like himself, earnest, young, a little scared. "Jaina?" The single word was so much more. It was both question and plea. Even as she stared at him, frozen like the bird before the snake, he reached out a gauntleted hand to her. She stared at it for a moment, thinking of all the times that hand had clasped hers warmly, had caressed her, had been lain on the wounded and glowed with healing light. She could not take that hand. "I'm sorry, Arthas. I can't watch you do this." There was no mask on his face now, no merciful coldness to shutter his pain away from her. Shocked disbelief radiated from him. She couldn't bear to look at him anymore. Gulping, her eyes filled with tears, Jaina turned away to find Uther regarding her with compassion and approval. He held out his hand to help her mount and she was grateful for his steadiness and composure. Jaina was shaking, badly, and clung to her horse as Uther mounted and, holding her horse's reins, led them both away from the greatest horror they had yet encountered in this whole dreadful ordeal. "Jaina?" Arthas's voice followed her. She closed her eyes, tears slipping from beneath closed lids. "I'm sorry," she whispered again. "I'm so sorry." "Jaina?...Jaina!"
 
She had turned her back on him.
He couldn't believe it. For a long moment he simply stared, dumbfounded, at her retreating figure. How could she abandon him like this? She knew him. She knew him better than anyone else in the world had known him, better maybe than he knew himself. She had always understood him. His mind suddenly went back to the night they had become lovers, bathed first in the orange glow of the wicker man's fire, and later the cool blue of moonlight. He'd held her to him, pleading. Don't deny me, Jaina. Don't ever deny me. Please. I never would, Arthas. Never. Oh yes, powerful words, whispered in a powerful moment, but now, now when it really counted, she had done exactly that-denied him and betrayed him. Dammit, she'd even agreed that if it were her, she'd want to be killed outright before the plague came and twisted her into a violation of everything good and true and natural. She'd left him, alone. If she'd stabbed him in the gut, he didn't think he could hurt worse. The thought came, brief and bright and sharp: Was she right? No. No, she couldn't be. Because if she was right, then he was about to become a mass murderer, and he knew that wasn't who he was. He knew it. He shook off the dazed horror, licking lips suddenly gone dry, and took a deep breath. Some of the men had departed with Uther. A lot of them. Too many, truth be told. Could he even take this city with this few? "Sir, if I may," Falric said, "I'm...well...I would rather be hacked into a thousand pieces than turn into one of them undead." There were murmurs of agreement and Arthas's heart lifted. He grasped his hammer. "There is no pleasure in what we do here," he said, "only grim necessity. Only the need to halt the plague, here and now, with the fewest casualties possible. Those within these walls are already dead. We know it, even if they do not, and we must kill them quickly and cleanly before the plague does it for us." He looked at each of them in turn, these men who had not shirked their duty. "They must be slain, and their homes destroyed, lest the dwellings become shelter for those whom we are too late to save." The men nodded their understanding, gripping their own weapons. "This is not a great and glorious battle. It is going to be ugly and painful, and I regret its necessity with my whole heart. But it is with my whole heart that I know we must do this." He lifted his hammer. "For the Light!" he cried, and in answer his men roared and lifted their weapons. He turned to the gate, took a deep breath, and
charged in. The ones that had risen were easy. They were the enemy; human no longer, but vile caricatures of what they had once been in life, and smashing their skulls or slicing their heads off was no more of a hardship than putting down a rabid beast. The others- They looked up at the armed men, at their prince, in first confusion and then in terror. At first, most of them didn't even reach for weapons; they knew the tabards, knew that the men who had come to kill them were supposed to be protecting them. They simply could not grasp why they were dying. Pain clenched Arthas's heart at the first one he struck down-a youth, barely out of puberty, who gazed up at him with incomprehension in his brown eyes and got out the words, "My lord, why are-" before Arthas cried out, as much in anguish at what he was being forced to do as anything else, and caved the boy's chest in with a hammer that he absently realized was no longer radiant with the Light. Perhaps the Light, too, grieved the dire necessity of its actions. A sob ripped through him and he bit it back, willed it back, and turned to the boy's mother. He thought it would get easier. It didn't. It just got worse. Arthas refused to yield. The men looked to him for an example; if he wavered, they would too, and then Mal'Ganis would triumph. So he kept his helm on so they would not see his face, and himself lit the torches that burned down the buildings full of screaming people locked inside, and refused to let the horrible sights and sounds slow him. It was a relief when some of the citizens of Stratholme began to fight back. Then the self-defense instinct kicked in. They still did not have a chance against professional soldiers and a trained paladin. But it mitigated that horrible sensation of-well, as Jaina had said, slaughtering them like farm animals. "I've been waiting for you, young prince." The voice was deep and shivered in his mind as well as his ears, resonant and...there was no other word for it...evil. A dreadlord, Kel'Thuzad had said. A dark name for a dark being. "I am Mal'Ganis." Something like joy shot through Arthas. He was vindicated. Mal'Ganis was here, he was behind the plague, and even as Arthas's men, who also heard the voice, turned and sought the source, the doors of a house where villagers had been hiding was flung open and walking corpses hastened out,
their bodies limned by a green, sickly glow. "As you can see, your people are now mine. I will now turn this city household by household, until the flame of life has been snuffed out... forever." Mal'Ganis laughed. The sound was unsettling, deep and raw and dark. "I won't allow it, Mal'Ganis!" Arthas cried. His heart swelled with the rightness of what he was doing. "Better that these people die by my hand than serve as your slaves in death!" More laughter, and then the disturbing presence was gone as swiftly as it had come, and Arthas was busy battling for his very life as a throng of undead, three deep, charged him. How long it took to slaughter every living-and dead-person in the city, Arthas would never be able to tell. But at last it was done. He was exhausted, shaking, nauseated by the smell of blood, smoke, and the sick, sweet scent of poisoned bread, hanging in the air even though the bakery itself was a burning building. Blood and ichor covered his once-bright armor. But he was not done. He waited for what he knew would come, and sure enough, a mere moment later, his enemy arrived, descending from the air to land on the roof of one of the few buildings still intact. Arthas staggered. The creature was enormous. His skin was blue-gray, like animated stone. Horns curved forward and up from his bald skull, and two mighty wings like those of bats stretched out behind him like living shadows. His legs, encased in metal adorned with spikes and decorated with disturbing images of bones and skulls, curved backward and ended in hooves, and the very light of his glowing green eyes revealed sharp teeth bared in an arrogant sneer. He stared up at the creature, rapt with horror, disbelief warring with the evidence before his eyes. He had heard tales; had seen pictures in old books, both in the library at home and in the Dalaran archives. But beholding this monstrous thing, towering over him, the sky behind him crimson and black with fire and smoke- A dreadlord was a demon. A thing out of myth. It couldn't be real-and yet it was here, standing before him in all its dreadful glory. Dreadlord. Fear threatened to overwhelm Arthas, and he knew if he let it it would cripple him. He would die at the hand of this monster-die without even a fight. And so with sheer will, he drowned out the mindless terror with
another, better emotion. Hatred. Righteous fury. He thought of those who had fallen beneath his hammer, the living and the dead, the ravening ghouls and the terrified women and children who didn't understand that he was trying to save their souls. Their faces bolstered him; they could not-would not-have died for nothing. Somehow Arthas found the courage to meet the demon stare for stare, clutching his hammer. "We're going to finish this right now, Mal'Ganis," he shouted. His voice was strong and firm. "Just you and me." The dreadlord threw back his head and laughed. "Brave words," he rumbled. "Unfortunately for you, it won't end here." Mal'Ganis grinned, black lips pulling back from sharp, pointed teeth. "Your journey has just begun, young prince." He swept an arm out, indicating Arthas's men, long, sharp claws glittering in the light of the flames that still burned and consumed the great city. "Gather your forces and meet me in the arctic land of Northrend. It is there that your true destiny will unfold." "My true destiny?" Arthas's voice cracked with anger and confusion. "What do you-" The words died in his throat as the air around Mal'Ganis began to shimmer and whirl in a familiar pattern. "No!" Arthas shrieked. He surged forward, blindly, recklessly, and would have been cut down in a heartbeat had not the teleportation spell been completed. Arthas cried out incoherently, swinging his faintly glowing hammer at empty air. "I'll hunt you down to the ends of the earth if I have to! Do you hear me? To the ends of the earth!" Manic, raging, screaming, he swung his hammer wildly at nothing until sheer exhaustion alone forced him to lower it. He propped it up and leaned on it, sweating, shaking with raw sobs of frustration and anger. To the ends of the earth.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Three days later, Lady Jaina Proudmoore walked the streets of what had once been a proud city, the glory of northern Lordaeron. Now, it was the stuff of nightmares. The stench was almost unbearable. She lifted a handkerchief, liberally scented with peacebloom essence, to her face in a partially successful attempt to filter out the worst of it. Fires that ought to have consumed themselves, or have abated at least slightly from lack of fuel, continued to rage at their full height, telling Jaina that some dark magic was afoot. Combined with the acrid smell of smoke that stung her eyes and throat was the reek of putrefaction. They lay as they had fallen, most of them unarmed. Tears welled in Jaina's eyes and slipped down her cheeks as she moved as if in a trance, carefully stepping over the bloated bodies. A soft whimper of pain escaped as she saw that Arthas and his men, in their misguided mercy, had not even spared the children. Would these bodies, lying still and stiff in death, have risen to attack her if Arthas had not slain them? Perhaps. Many of them, certainly; the grain had indeed been distributed and consumed. But every single one? She would never know, nor would he. "Jaina-I ask you again, come with me." His voice was intense, but it was clear his mind was a thousand leagues away. "He escaped me. I saved the city's inhabitants from becoming his slaves, but-at the last minute he got away. He's in Northrend. Come with me." Jaina closed her eyes. She did not want to remember that conversation of a day and a half ago. She did not want to remember how he looked, cold and angry and distant, fixated on killing this dreadlord-Light, a demon-at the expense of everything else. She stumbled across a body and her eyes snapped open again to the horror that the man she had loved-still did love, despite everything, how she could still love him after this she did not know, but Light save her, she did-
"Arthas-it's a trap. He's a demon lord. If he was powerful enough to elude you in St-Stratholme, he will certainly defeat you in his own territory, where he is strongest. Don't go...please..." She had wanted to throw herself into his arms, physically keep him there beside her. He couldn't go to Northrend. He would be going to his death. And although he had dealt out so much to others, Jaina found she could not wish for his. "So much death," she murmured. "I can't believe Arthas could've done this." And yet she knew he had. A whole city... "Jaina? Jaina Proudmoore!" Jaina started violently, snapped out of her sickened trance by the sound of the familiar voice. Uther. A strange feeling of relief swept over her as she turned in the direction of the hail. Uther had always intimidated her slightly; he was so large and powerful and...well...so deeply entrenched in the Light. She recalled with an incongruously guilty flush how, when she and Arthas were younger, they used to make fun of Uther's piety, which to them verged on the pompous and sanctimonious, behind the knight's back. He was a fairly easy target. But three excruciating days ago, she and Uther had both stood against Arthas. "You swore you would never deny me, Jaina," Arthas accused, his voice sharp as an icy knife blade. "But when I most needed your support, your understanding, you turned against me." "I-you-Arthas, we didn't know enough to-" "And now, you refuse to aid me. I'm going to Northrend, Jaina. I would have you with me. To help me stop this evil. Won't you come?" Jaina winced. Uther noticed, but said nothing. Clad in full plate armor despite the overwhelming heat of the unnaturally blazing fires, he strode swiftly toward her. His stature and presence was now a picture of strength and solidity rather than intimidation to her. He did not embrace her, but did grasp her arms reassuringly. "I thought I might find you here. Where has he gone, girl? Where has Arthas taken the fleet?" Jaina's eyes widened. "The fleet?" Uther grunted an affirmation. "He's commandeered the entire Lordaeron fleet and taken off with them. Sent only the briefest message to his own father. We don't know why they obeyed without direct orders from their commanders."
Jaina gave him a small, sad smile. "Because he's their prince. He's Arthas. They love him. They didn't know about...this." A flicker of pain crossed Uther's rugged features and he nodded. "Aye," he said softly. "He's always been good to the men who serve him. They can tell that he genuinely cares about them, and they'll serve him with their lives." Regret laced the words. They were true, insofar as they went, and once Arthas had deserved such undying devotion. "And now you refuse to aid me...." Uther shook her gently, bringing her back to the present. "Do you know where he might have taken them, child?" Jaina took a deep breath. "He came to me before he left. I pleaded with him not to go. I told him it sounded like a trap-" "Where?" Uther was relentless. "Northrend. He's gone to Northrend to hunt Mal'Ganis-the demon lord who is responsible for the plague. He couldn't defeat him...here." "A demon lord? Damn that boy!" The outburst startled Jaina. "I've got to inform Terenas." "I tried to stop him," Jaina repeated. "Then...and when he..." She gestured helplessly at the almost inconceivable number of dead that kept them silent company. She wondered for the thousandth time if she could have stopped it-if she had found the right words, touched Arthas the right way, if he would have been swayed. "But I failed." I failed you, Arthas. I failed these people-I failed myself. Uther's heavy, gauntleted hand dropped on her slim shoulder. "Don't be too hard on yourself, girl." She laughed humorlessly. "Is it that obvious?" "Anyone with a heart would wonder the same. I know I do." She glanced up at him, startled at the admission. "You do?" Jaina asked. He nodded, his eyes bloodshot from exhaustion, and there was a pain in those depths that struck her to the core. "I could not fight him. He is still my prince. But I wonder...could I have stood in his path? Said something else, done something else?" Uther sighed and shook his head. "Perhaps. Perhaps not. But that moment is in the past and my choices cannot be undone. You and I must both look to the future now. Jaina Proudmoore, you had nothing to do with this...slaughter. Thank you for telling me where he has gone."
She lowered her head. "I feel like I've betrayed him again." "Jaina, you may have saved him-and all the men who are going with him in ignorance of what he's become." Startled at his choice of words, she looked up sharply. "What he's become? He's still Arthas, Uther!" Uther's eyes looked haunted. "Aye, he is. But he made a dreadful choice -and one with repercussions we've yet to see played out. I don't know that he can come back from this." Uther turned and eyed the dead. "We know the dead can be raised to unlife. That demons truly exist. Now I wonder if there are such things as ghosts, too. If there are, our prince will be ten thick in them." He bowed to her. "Come away from this place, lady." She shook her head. "No, not yet. I'm not ready." He searched her eyes, then nodded. "As you will. Light be with you, Lady Jaina Proudmoore." "And you, Uther the Lightbringer." She gave him the best smile she could muster and watched as he strode off. Arthas would no doubt see this as yet another betrayal, but if it saved his life-then she could live with that. The smell was starting to become more than even her stubborn will would permit her to handle. She paused for a last look. Part of her wondered why she had come here; the other part knew. She had come to brand these images into her brain, to understand the depth of what had happened. She must never, ever forget. Whether or not Arthas was past reaching, she didn't know, but what happened here would need to never become a footnote in the history books. A raven wheeled down slowly. She wanted to rush forward and shoo it away, to try to protect the poor, battered corpses, but it was only doing what its nature told it to do. It did not have a conscience to tell it that what it was doing was offensive to human sensibilities. She looked at the raven for a moment, and then her eyes widened. It began to shift, change, grow, and in an instant, where a carrion bird had once perched stood a man. She gasped in recognition-this same prophet she had seen twice before. "You!" He inclined his head, and gave her an odd smile that told her without words, I recognize you, too. This was the third time she had seen him-once when he was speaking with Antonidas, and once with Arthas. She had been invisible on both occasions-and clearly, her invisibility spell had not fooled
him for a moment, either time. "The dead in this land might lie still for the time being, but don't be fooled. Your prince will find only death in the cold north." His blunt words made her flinch slightly. "Arthas is only doing what he believes is right." The words were true, and she knew it. Whatever his failings were, he had been utterly sincere in his belief that the purging of Stratholme was the only option. The prophet's gaze softened. "Commendable as that may be," he said, "his passions will be his undoing. It falls to you now, young sorceress." "What? Me?" "Antonidas has dismissed me. Terenas and Arthas as well. Both rulers of men and masters of magic have turned their faces from true understanding. But I think you may not." The aura of power around him was palpable. Jaina could almost see it, swirling about him, heady and strong. He stepped closer to her and placed his hand on her shoulder. She gazed up into his eyes, confused. "You must lead your people west to the ancient lands of Kalimdor. Only there can you combat the shadow and save this world from the flame." Staring into those eyes, Jaina knew he was right. There was no control, no compelling-just a knowing, deep and certain and down to her bones. "I-" Swallowing hard, she took one last look at the horrors wrought by the man she loved and still did love, and nodded. "I will do as you say." And leave my Arthas to the destiny he has chosen. There is no other way. "It will take time, to gather them all. To make them believe me." "I do not know that you have that much time left. So much of it has already been squandered." Jaina lifted her chin. "I cannot go without trying. If you know so much about me, then surely you must know that." The raven prophet seemed to relax marginally and smiled at her, squeezing her shoulder. "Do what you feel you must, but do not tarry overlong. The hourglass empties swiftly, and delay could be deadly." She nodded, too overcome to speak. So many to talk to-Antonidas's chief among them. If he would listen to anyone, she thought, it would be her. She would bear witness for these dead-for the folly of not retreating to Kalimdor while the living yet walked here. The prophet's form dwindled and shifted, becoming once again that of
the large black bird, and he flew off with a rustle of wings. And somehow as it brushed her face, the wind from those black wings did not smell of carrion, or smoke, or death. It smelled clean and fresh. It smelled of hope.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Northrend was the name of the land, Daggercap Bay the site where the Lordaeron fleet made harbor. The water, deep and choppy with an unforgiving wind, was a cold blue-gray. Sheer cliffs were dotted with tenacious pine trees soaring upward, providing a natural defense of the small, flat area where Arthas and his men would make camp. A waterfall tumbled down, crashing in a billow of spray from a great height. It was all in all more pleasant a place than he had expected, at least for the moment; certainly not the obvious home for a demon lord. Arthas leaped from the boat and slogged onto the shore, his eyes darting about, absorbing everything. The wind, keening like a lost child, stirred his long blond hair, caressing it with cold fingers. Beside him, one of the captains of the ships he had commandeered without consulting his father shivered and clapped his hands together, trying to warm them. "This is a Light-forsaken land, isn't it? You can barely even see the sun! This howling wind cuts to the bone and you're not even shaking." Vaguely surprised, Arthas realized that the man was right. He felt the cold-felt it knifing into him-but he did not tremble. "Milord, are you all right?" "Captain, are all my forces accounted for?" Arthas didn't bother to answer the question. It was a foolish one. Of course he wasn't all right. He had been forced to slaughter the populace of an entire city in order to stop a worse atrocity. Jaina and Uther had both turned their backs on him. And a demon lord was awaiting his arrival. "Nearly. There are only a few ships that-" "Very well. Our first priority is to set up a base camp with proper defenses. There's no telling what's waiting for us out there in the shadows." There, that would shut the man up and give him something to do. Arthas lent his assistance, working as hard as the men he commanded to erect basic shelter. He missed Jaina's handiness with flames as they lit fires against the encroaching darkness and cold. Hell, he missed Jaina. But he would learn not
to. She failed him when he most needed her, and he would not hold such people in his heart any longer. It needed to be strong, not soft; determined, not aching. There was no place in it for weakness, if he would defeat Mal'Ganis. There was no place in it for warmth. The night passed without incident. Arthas stayed awake in his tent until the small hours of the morning, perusing what incomplete maps he had been able to find. When at last he fell asleep, he dreamed, and it was both joyous and nightmarish. He was again a youth, with everything in the world to look forward to, riding the glorious white horse he so loved. Again, they were one, perfectly paired, and nothing would stop them. And even as he dreamed, Arthas felt the horror descend upon him as he urged Invincible to make the fatal jump. The anguish, not in the slightest abated by the fact that this was a mere dream and he knew it as such, ripped through him yet again. And again, he drew his sword, and stabbed his devoted friend through his heart. But this time...this time he realized that he was holding a completely different sword than the simple, basic weapon he had held at that dreadful moment. This time the sword was huge, two handed, beautifully fashioned. Runes glowed along its length. Cool blue mist wafted from it, cold as the snow in which Invincible lay. And when he withdrew the sword, Arthas did not find himself staring at a slain beast. Instead Invincible whickered and leaped to his feet, completely healed, somehow stronger than before. He seemed to glow now, his coat radiant rather than merely white, and Arthas bolted upright from where he had fallen asleep over the maps, tears in his eyes and a sob of joy on his lips. Surely, this was an omen. The morning dawned frigid and gray, and he was up before first light, eager to begin combing the land for signs of the dreadlord. He was here; Arthas knew it. But that first day, they found nothing more than a few pockets of undead. As the days passed, with more and more territory charted, Arthas's spirits started to sink. Intellectually, he realized that Northrend was a vast continent, barely explored. Mal'Ganis was a dreadlord, yes, and the clusters of undead they had found thus far would likely be a good indicator of his presence. But not the only one. He could be anywhere-or nowhere. This whole revelation that he would be in Northrend could have been nothing more than an elaborate trick to get Arthas out of his way, so that the demon could move somewhere else entirely and-
No. That way lay madness. The dreadlord was arrogant, certain he would eventually best the human prince. Arthas had to believe he was here. Had to. Of course, that could also mean that Jaina had been right. That Mal'Ganis was indeed here, and had laid a trap for him. None of these thoughts was pleasant, and the more Arthas chewed on them, the more agitated he became. It was well into the second week of searching before Arthas found anything to offer him hope. They had marched off in a different direction, after the initial pair of scouts returned bearing news of large clusters of undead. They found the reported undead-lying in pieces on the frozen earth. Before Arthas could even form a thought, he and his men had come under fire. "Take cover!" Arthas cried, and they dove for whatever they could find- tree, rock, even snowbanks. Almost as soon as it had started, the attack ceased and a shout rang out. "Bloody hell! Ye're not undead! Ye're all alive!" It was a voice that Arthas recognized and had never thought to encounter in this desolate land. Only one person he knew could swear so enthusiastically, and for a moment, he forgot why he was here, what he was searching for, and felt only delight and fond remembrance of a time long past. "Muradin?" Arthas cried in shock and pleasure. "Muradin Bronzebeard, is that you?" The stout dwarf stepped out from behind the row of weapons, peering cautiously. The scowl on his face was replaced by an enormous grin. "Arthas, lad! I never imagined that ye'd be th' one tae come tae our rescue!" He strode forward, his face even more hidden by the bushy beard Arthas remembered from his youth, if such a thing was possible, his eyes more lined but now twinkling with pleasure. He spread his arms, marched up to Arthas, and embraced the prince about the waist. Arthas laughed-Light, it had been so long since he had laughed-and hugged his old friend and trainer back. As they drew apart, the meaning of Muradin's words registered on Arthas. "Rescue? Muradin, I didn't even know you were here. I came to-" He snapped his mouth closed on the words. He didn't know how Muradin would react yet, and so simply smiled at the dwarf. "That can all wait," he said instead. "Come, my old friend. We've got a base camp set up not too far from here. Looks like you and your men could use a hot meal." "If ye have ale as well, that'd be a yes from me," Muradin grinned.
There was a celebratory air as Arthas, Muradin, his second in command Baelgun, and the other dwarves marched into camp that even managed to take a slight edge off the never-ending cold of the place. Arthas knew that dwarves were used to cold climates and were a solid, strong people, but he noted the looks of relief and gratitude that flitted across the bearded faces as they were handed bowls of steaming hot stew. It was difficult, but Arthas bit his tongue against the questions that wanted to come pouring out of him until Muradin and his men were taken care of. He then beckoned Muradin to join him a ways away from the center of the camp, near where his own personal tent was set up. "So," he said, as his former trainer began shoveling hot food down with the regularity and seemingly unstoppable quality of a well-built gnomish machine, "what were you doing up here anyway?" Muradin swallowed his bite of food and reached for some ale to wash it down with. "Well, lad, this isn't necessarily something tae be sharin' wi' everyone." Arthas nodded his understanding. Only a few of the members of the fleet he'd commandeered knew the whole story of why they were in Northrend. "I appreciate your trusting me, Muradin." The dwarf clapped him on the shoulder. "Ye've grown up right bonny, ye have, lad. If ye can find yer way tae this forsaken land, ye've a right tae know what me and me men are doing here. I'm looking fer a legend." His eyes twinkled as he gulped some ale, wiped his mouth and continued. "My people have always been interested in rare items, ye ken tha'." "Indeed." Arthas recalled hearing something about Muradin helping to form something called the Explorer's League. It was based in Ironforge, and its members traveled the world to gather knowledge and search for archeological treasures. "So you're on League business here?" "Aye, indeed. I've been here many times before. Oddly compelling land, this one. Doesn't give up its secrets easily...an' that makes it intriguin'." He fished in his pack and came out with a leather-bound journal that looked like it had seen better days and shoved it at Arthas with a grunt. The prince took it and began to thumb through the pages. There were hundreds of sketches of creatures, landmarks, and ruins. "There's more here than meets the eye at first glance." Looking at the images, Arthas was forced to agree. "Most of the time, it's just research," Muradin continued. "Learnin'."
Arthas closed the book and gave it back to Muradin. "When you saw us you were surprised-not that we were undead, but that we weren't. How long have you been here-and what is it you've learned?" Muradin scraped the last bit of stew from his bowl, wiped it clean with a hunk of bread, and ate that as well. He sighed a little. "Ah, I do miss th' pastries yer palace baker used tae make." He fished for his pipe. "An' in answer tae yer question, long enough to know that something is amiss here. There's some...force growin'. It's bad and it's getting badder. I talked to yer father; I think this power is nae happy with just sitting here in Northrend." Arthas fought back a double rush of both worry and excitement, trying to appear composed. "You think it might pose a danger to my people?" Muradin leaned back and lit the pipe. The smell of his preferred tobacco, its familiarity comforting in this alien land, teased Arthas's nostrils. "Aye, I do. I think it's part o' the creation o' these pesky undead." Arthas decided it was time to share what he knew. He spoke quickly but calmly, telling Muradin about the plagued grain. About Kel'Thuzad, and the Cult of the Damned, and his own first horrifying encounter with the transformed farmers. About learning that Mal'Ganis, a dreadlord in the flesh, was the one behind the plague, and about the demon's taunting invitation to come here to Northrend. He mentioned Stratholme obliquely. "The plague had reached even there," he said. "I made sure that Mal'Ganis had no more corpses to use for his own sick purposes." That was enough; it was all true, and he was not certain that Muradin would understand the awful necessity of what Arthas had been forced to do. Jaina and Uther certainly hadn't, and they'd actually seen what Arthas had been up against. Muradin grunted. "Bad business, that. Perhaps this certain artifact I'm lookin' fer can be of use to you in fighting this dreadlord. As far as rare an' magical things go, this one's a beaut. Information about it has only recently begun to surface, but ever since we learned about it-well, we've been looking long and hard. Have a few special magical items tae try an' track it down, but no luck yet." He lifted his eyes from Arthas and looked beyond the prince, toward the wilderness that loomed. For a moment, the twinkle in his eyes abated, replaced by a somberness that the more youthful Arthas had never seen there. Arthas waited, burning with curiosity, but not wanting to appear the impatient child Muradin no doubt remembered him as being.
Muradin refocused, regarding Arthas intently. "We're searching for a runeblade called Frostmourne." Frostmourne. Arthas felt a slight shiver in his soul at the word. An ominous name, for a weapon of legend. Runeblades were not unheard of, but they were extremely rare and terribly powerful weapons. He glanced over at his hammer, sitting propped up against a tree where he'd placed it after returning from his discovery of Muradin. It was a beautiful weapon, and he had cherished it, although recently the Light seemed to shine from it sluggishly, sometimes not at all. But a runeblade- A sudden certainty seized him, as if fate were whispering in his ear. Northrend was a vast place. Surely it was not coincidence that he had encountered Muradin. If he had Frostmourne-surely he could slay Mal'Ganis. End this plague. Save his people. The dwarf and he had come together for a reason. It was destiny at work. Muradin was speaking and Arthas jerked his attention back to him. "We came here tae recover Frostmourne, but the closer we come tae doin' so, the more undead we encounter. And I'm too old tae think that mere coincidence." Arthas smiled softly. So Muradin, too, did not believe in coincidence. The certainty inside his gut grew. "You think Mal'Ganis doesn't want us to find it," Arthas murmured. "I wouldna think that he'd be happy tae see ye charging at him wi' that kind o' weapon in yer fist, that's true enough." "It sounds like we can help each other, then," Arthas said. "We'll help you and your League find Frostmourne, and you can help us against Mal'Ganis." "A sound plan," Muradin agreed, the smoke writhing up about him in fragrant blue-black plumes. "Arthas, me lad...any more o' that ale available?" The days passed. Muradin and Arthas compared notes. They had a double quest now-Mal'Ganis and the runeblade. Eventually they decided that the wisest course of action would be to press inward and send the fleet northward, to establish a new camp there. They found themselves fighting not only undead, but famished and vicious packs of wolves, strange beings that seemed to be part wolverine and part human, and a race of trolls that seemed as at home here in the frigid north as their cousins did in the steamy jungles
of Stranglethorn. Muradin was not as surprised as the human prince to find such beings; apparently small clusters of similar so-called "ice trolls" lurked near the dwarven capital of Ironforge. Arthas learned from Muradin that the undead had bases here; strange, ziggurat-like structures, pulsing with dark magic, that had belonged to an older and presumably extinct race, since the former residents didn't seem to object. So not only did the walking corpses themselves need to be destroyed, their refuges needed to be as well. Yet each day seemed to bring Arthas no nearer to his goal. There were plenty of traces of Mal'Ganis's evil, but none of the dreadlord himself. Nor was Muradin's quest for the enticing Frostmourne more successful. The clues, arcane and mundane both, were narrowing the search area, but thus far, the runeblade remained only a legend for all the reality it held for them. The day when things changed, Arthas was in a foul temper. He was returning to their makeshift traveling camp, hungry and tired and cold, after yet another fruitless foray. So lost in his irritation was he that it was several seconds before comprehension dawned. The guards were not at their posts. "What the-" He turned to look at Muradin, who immediately gripped his axe. There were no bodies, of course; if the undead had attacked while he was away, the corpses would have been raised in the cruelest example of conscription the world had ever known. But there should have been blood, signs of a struggle...but there was none. They advanced cautiously, quietly. The camp was deserted-packed up, even, save for a handful of men. They looked up as Arthas entered and saluted him. In answer to his unvoiced question, one captain, Luc Valonforth, said, "Apologies, milord. Your father had our troops recalled at Lord Uther's request. The expedition is cancelled." A muscle twitched near Arthas's eye. "My father-recalled my troops. Because Lord Uther told him to?" The captain looked nervous and glanced sideways at Muradin, then replied, "Aye, sir. We wanted to wait for you but the emissary was quite insistent. All the men headed northwest to meet up with the fleet. Our scout informed us that the roads, such as they are, are being held by the undead, so they're busy clearing a path through the woods. I'm sure you'll be able to catch up with them quickly, sir." "Of course," Arthas said, and forced a smile. Inwardly he was seething.
"Excuse me a moment." He dropped a hand on Muradin's shoulder and steered the dwarf off to an area where they could speak quietly. "Eh, I'm sorry, lad. It's frustrating tae have tae pick up an-" "No." Muradin blinked. "Come again?" "I'm not going back. Muradin, if my warriors abandon me, I'll never defeat Mal'Ganis! That plague won't ever stop!" Despite himself, his voice rose at the last word and a few curious glances were thrown his way. "Lad, it's yer father. The king. Ye can't countermand an order. That's treason." Arthas snorted. Perhaps it is my father who is turning traitor to his own people, he thought, but did not say. "I stripped Uther of his rank. I dissolved the order. He's got no right to do this. Father has been deceived." "Well, then, ye'll have tae' take it up wi' him when ye get back. Make him see reason, if it's all as ye say it is. But ye canna disobey." Arthas shot the dwarf a harsh glance. If it's all as I say it is? What, was the damned dwarf implying that Arthas was lying to him? "You're right about one thing. My men are loyal to what they understand as the chain of command. They'd never refuse to go home if they had direct orders." He rubbed his chin thoughtfully, and smiled as the idea took shape. "That's it! We'll simply deny them the way to get home. They won't be disobeying- they'll simply be unable to obey." Muradin's bushy brows drew together in a frown. "What are ye saying?" For answer, Arthas gave him a wolfish grin and told him his plan. Muradin seemed shocked. "Isn't that a bit much, lad?" Muradin's tone told him that he thought it was indeed a bit much, perhaps a whole hell of a lot more than a "bit." Arthas ignored him. Muradin hadn't seen what he had seen; hadn't been forced to do what he had done. He would understand, soon enough. When they finally faced Mal'Ganis. Arthas knew that he would defeat the dreadlord. He had to. He would end the plague, end the threat to his people. Then the destruction of the vessels would be nothing more than an inconvenience-comparatively minor when measured against the survival of the citizens of Lordaeron. "I know it sounds drastic, but it has to be this way. It has to."
 
A few hours later, Arthas stood on the Forgotten Shore and watched his entire fleet burn. The answer had been simple. The men could not take the ships home- could not abandon him-if there were no ships to take. And so Arthas had burned them all. He had cut through the woods, hiring mercenaries first to help them slaughter the undead and then to douse the wooden vessels liberally with oil and set them aflame. In this land of constant cold and feeble light, the heat coming off the fiery vessels was disconcertingly welcome. Arthas lifted his hand to shield his eyes from the brightness. Beside him, Muradin sighed and shook his head. He and the other dwarves, who muttered under their breaths as they watched the conflagration, were still not certain this was the right path. Arthas folded his arms, his back cold, his face and front almost scorched with the heat, solemnly watching the flaming skeleton of one of the ships crack apart with a whumph. "Damn Uther for making me do this!" he murmured. He would show the paladin-the former paladin. He would show Uther, and Jaina, and his father. He had not shirked his duty, no matter how awful or brutal it was. He would return triumphant, having done what needed to be done-things that the softer-hearted had cringed from doing. And because of him, because of his willingness to shoulder the burden of responsibility, his people would survive. So loud was the sound of flames licking at the oil-drenched wood that for a moment, it drowned out the despairing cries of the men as they emerged and beheld the sight. "Prince Arthas! Our ships!" "What happened? How are we getting home?" The idea had been simmering in the back of his mind for several hours now. Arthas knew his men would be aghast at discovering that they were stranded here. They had agreed to follow him, true, but Muradin had been right. They would have seen orders from his father as superseding any order he could give them. And Mal'Ganis would have won. But they would not understand how very badly they needed to stop the threat here, now- His eyes fell on the mercenaries he had hired. No one would miss them. They could be bought and sold. If someone had paid them to kill him, they would have done so as readily as helping him. So many had died-good
people, noble people, innocents. Their senseless deaths cried out to be avenged. And if Arthas's men were not with him with all their hearts, he would not triumph. Arthas could not bear it. "Quickly, my warriors!" he cried, lifting his hammer. It did not glow with the Light; he was starting to cease expecting it to. He pointed at the mercenaries just now dragging the small boats filled with supplies ashore from the burning ships. "These murderous creatures have burned our ships and robbed you of your way home! Slay them all in the name of Lordaeron!" And he led the charge.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Arthas recognized the sound of Muradin's short but heavy stride even before the dwarf yanked the tent flap back and glared at him. They stared at each other for a long moment, then Muradin jerked his head toward the outside and let the flap fall. For a moment, Arthas was hurtled back in time to when he was a child accidentally flinging a training sword across the room. He frowned and rose, following Muradin to an area far away from the men. The dwarf didn't mince words. "Ye lied tae yer men and betrayed the mercenaries who fought for ye!" Muradin snapped, shoving his face up to Arthas's as best he could from his much shorter height. "That's nae the lad I trained. That's nae the man who was inducted into th' order of the Silver Hand. That's nae King Terenas's boy." "I am no one's boy," Arthas spat, shoving Muradin away. "I did what I deemed necessary." He half expected Muradin to strike him, but instead the anger seemed to bleed away from his old trainer. "What's happening tae ye, Arthas?" Muradin said quietly, his voice holding a world of pain and confusion. "Is vengeance all that's important to ye?" "Spare me, Muradin," Arthas growled. "You weren't there to see what Mal'Ganis did to my homeland. What he did to innocent men, women, and children!" "I've heard what ye did," Muradin said quietly. "Some o' yer men have been a wee bit free wi' their tongues when ale has loosened them. I know what I think-but I also know that I canna judge ye. Ye're right, I wasn't there. Thank the Light, I didn't have tae make that kind o' decision. But even so-something's happening. Ye-" Mortar fire and cries of alarm interrupted him. In a heartbeat, Muradin and Arthas had their weapons out and had turned back to the encampment. The men were still scrambling for weapons. Falric was barking orders to the humans, while Baelgun was organizing the dwarves. There came the sound of engagement from outside the encampment, and Arthas could see the press of
undead closing in. His hands clenched on his hammer. This had all the earmarks of a coordinated attack, rather than a random encounter. "The Dark Lord said you would come," came a voice that was by now familiar to Arthas. Elation filled him. Mal'Ganis was here! It had not been a wild-goose chase after all. "This is where your journey ends, boy. Trapped and freezing at the roof of the world, with only death to sing the tale of your doom." Muradin scratched his beard, his sharp eyes darting about. Outside the perimeter of the camp came the sounds of battle. "This looks bad," he admitted with characteristic dwarven understatement. "We're completely surrounded." Arthas stared, agonized. "We could have done it," he whispered. "With Frostmourne...we could have done it." Muradin glanced away. "There...well lad, I have been having me doubts. About th' sword. And, tae speak truly, about ye as well." It took a second for Arthas to realize what Muradin was saying. "You- are you telling me you've figured out how to find it?" At Muradin's nod, Arthas seized him by the arm. "Whatever your doubts, Muradin, you can't possibly have them now. Not with Mal'Ganis right here. If you know where it is, then take me to it. Help me claim Frostmourne! You said it yourself-you didn't think that Mal'Ganis would like to see me with Frostmourne in my fist. Mal'Ganis has more troops than we do. Without Frostmourne, we'll fall, you know we will!" Muradin gave him an agonized look, then closed his eyes. "I have a bad feeling about this, lad. It's why I've nae pressed on before -something about this artifact, how the information has come-it doesnae feel right. But I promised I'd see this through. Ye go gather a few men and I'll find ye that runeblade." Arthas clapped his old friend on the shoulder. This was it. I'll get that damned runeblade, and I'll shove it through your black heart, dreadlord. I'll make you pay. "Close that gap over there!" Falric was shouting. "Davan, fire!" The boom of mortar fire echoed through the camp as Arthas raced toward his second in command. "Captain Falric!" Falric turned to him. "Sir...we're utterly surrounded. We can hold out for a while, but eventually they're going to wear us down. Who-what-we lose
in numbers, they'll gain." "I know, Captain. Muradin and I are going to go find Frostmourne." Falric's eyes widened slightly in both shock and hope. Arthas had shared the knowledge of the sword-and its supposed vast power-with a few of his most trusted men. "Once we have it, victory will be certain. Can you buy us the time?" "Aye, Your Highness." Falric grinned, but he still looked worried even as he said, "We'll hold these undead bastards off." A few moments later, Muradin, armed with a map and a strange glowing object, joined Arthas and a handful of men. His mouth was etched in a frown and his eyes were unhappy, but his body was straight. Falric gave the signal, and began to create a distraction. Most of the undead suddenly turned and concentrated their efforts on him, leaving the back area of the camp open. "Let's go," Arthas said grimly.
 
Muradin barked out directions as he alternately peered at his map and at the glowing object that seemed to pulse erratically. They moved as quickly as possible through the deep snow where he indicated, stopping only occasionally for the briefests of breaks to reassess. The sky darkened as clouds gathered. Snow began to fall, slowing them further. Arthas began to move automatically. The snow made it impossible to see more than a few feet ahead. He no longer noticed or cared in which direction he went, simply moving his legs as he followed Muradin's lead. Time seemed to have no meaning. He could have been moving for minutes or days. His mind was consumed with thoughts of Frostmourne. Their salvation. Arthas knew it would be. But could they reach it before his men at the camp fell to the undead and their demonic master? Falric had said they could hold -for a time. How much longer? To finally know that Mal'Ganis was here- at his own base camp-and to not be able to attack was- "There," Muradin said, almost reverently, pointing. "It's inside there." Arthas halted, blinking eyes that were narrowed to slits against the driving snow, their lashes crusted with ice. They stood before the mouth of a cavern, stark and ominous-seeming in the snow-swirled darkness of the gray day. There was some kind of illumination inside, a soft, blue-green radiance he could just barely glimpse. Bone-weary, frozen as he was, excitement shot through him. He forced his numbed mouth to form words.
"Frostmourne...and the end of Mal'Ganis. The end of the plague. Come on!" A second wind seemed to take him and he hastened forward, forcing his legs to obey. "Lad!" Muradin's voice brought him up sharply. "So precious a treasure won't be just left sitting around for anyone tae find. We must proceed wi' a bit o' caution." Arthas chafed, but Muradin had more experience in these matters. So he nodded, gripped his hammer firmly, and entered warily. The immediate relief from the wind and driving snow heartened him, and they moved deeper into the heart of the cavern. The illumination he had glimpsed from outside proved to be coming from softly glowing turquoise crystals and veins of ore, embedded in the rock walls, floors, and ceilings themselves. He had heard of such luminescent crystals and was now grateful for the light they provided. His men would be able to concentrate on holding their weapons, not torches. Once, his hammer would have glowed with enough radiance to guide them. He frowned at the thought, then pushed it down. It did not matter where light to see by came from, only that it was present. It was then that they heard the voices. Muradin had been right-they were expected. The voices were deep, hollow, and cold-sounding, and their words were dire as they floated to Arthas's ears. "Turn back, mortals. Death and darkness are all that await you in this forsaken vault. You shall not pass." Muradin halted. "Lad," he said, his voice soft, though in this place it seemed to echo endlessly, "perhaps we should listen." "Listen to what?" Arthas cried. "A pathetic last effort to turn me from my path to save my people? It's going to take more than ominous words to do that." Gripping his hammer he hastened forward, rounded a corner-and stopped in his tracks, trying to take in everything at once. They had found the owners of the icy voices. For a moment, Arthas was reminded of Jaina's obedient water elemental, who had helped her fight off the ogres on that long-ago day before everything had taken such grim and horrific turns. The beings hovered over the cold stone floor of the cavern, made of ice and unnatural essence instead of water, wearing armor that looked as if it had grown of and from them. They had helms, but no faces; gauntlets, weapons and shields, but no arms.
Alarming though they were, Arthas gave these fearsome elemental spirits no more than a passing glance as his eye was drawn to the reason they had come here. Frostmourne. It was caught in a hovering, jagged chunk of ice, the runes that ran the length of its blade glowing a cool blue. Below it was a dais of some sort, standing on a large gently raised mound that was covered in a dusting of snow. A soft light, coming from somewhere high above where the cavern was open to daylight, shone down on the runeblade. The icy prison hid some details of the sword's shape and form, exaggerated others. It was revealed and concealed at the same time, and all the more tempting, like a new lover imperfectly glimpsed through a gauzy curtain. Arthas knew the blade-it was the selfsame sword he had seen in his dream when he first arrived. The sword that had not killed Invincible, but that had brought him back healed and healthy. He'd thought it a good omen then, but now he knew it was a true sign. This was what he had come to find. This sword would change everything. Arthas stared raptly at it, his hands almost physically aching to grasp it, his fingers to wrap themselves around the hilt, his arms to feel the weapon swinging smoothly in the blow that would end Mal'Ganis, end the torment he had visited upon the people of Lordaeron, end this lust for revenge. Drawn, he stepped forward. The uncanny elemental spirit drew its icy sword. "Turn away, before it is too late," it intoned. "Still trying to protect the sword, are you?" Arthas snarled, angry and embarrassed at his reaction. "No." The being's voice rumbled the word. "Trying to protect you from it." For a second, Arthas stared in surprise. Then he shook his head, eyes narrowing in determination. This was nothing more than a trick. He could never turn away from Frostmourne-turn away from saving his people. He would not fall for the lie. He charged and his men followed. The entities converged on them, attacking with their unnatural weapons, but Arthas focused his attention on the leader, the one assigned to guard Frostmourne. All his pent-up hope, worry, fear, and frustration, he unleashed on the strange protector. His men did likewise, turning to attack the other elemental guardians of the sword. His hammer rose and fell, rose and fell, shattering the icy armor as cries of anger were ripped from his throat. How dare this thing
stand between him and Frostmourne? How dare it- With a final agonized sound, like that of the rattle coming from a dying man's throat, the spirit flung up what passed for hands and disappeared. Arthas stood staring, panting, the breath coming from his chilled lips in white puffs. Then he turned to the hard-won prize. All misgivings disappeared as he again laid eyes on the sword. "Behold, Muradin," he breathed, aware that his voice was shaking, "our salvation, Frostmourne." "Hold, lad." Muradin's blunt words, almost an order, were like cold water doused on Arthas. He blinked, startled out of his trancelike rapture, and turned to look at the dwarf. "What? Why?" he demanded. Muradin was staring, eyes narrowed, at the hovering sword and the dais below it. "Something's not right here." He pointed a stubby finger at the runeblade. "This has been too easy. And look at it, sitting here wi' light coming from who knows where, like a flower waiting tae be plucked." "Too easy?" Arthas shot him a disbelieving glance. "It's taken you long enough to find it. And we had to fight these things to get to it." "Bah," snorted Muradin. "Everything I ken about artifacts is telling me that there's something as fishy here as the Booty Bay docks." He sighed, his brow still furrowed. "Wait...there's an inscription on the dais. Let me see if I can read this. It might tell us something." Both of them advanced, Muradin to kneel and peer at the writing, Arthas to draw closer to the beckoning sword. Arthas gave the inscription that so intrigued Muradin a cursory glance. It was not written in any language he knew, but the dwarf seemed to be able to read it, judging by how his eyes flickered across the letters. Arthas lifted a hand and stroked the ice that separated them-smooth, slick, deathly cold-ice, yes, but there was something unusual about it. It wasn't simply frozen water. He didn't know how he could tell, but he could. There was something very powerful, almost unearthly about it. Frostmourne... "Aye, I thought I recognized this. It's written in Kalimag-the elemental language," Muradin continued. He frowned as he read. "It's...a warning." "Warning? Warning of what?" Perhaps shattering the ice would damage the sword somehow, Arthas thought. The unnatural ice block itself, though, seemed to have been-almost cut from another, larger piece of ice. Muradin
translated slowly. Arthas listened with half an ear, his eyes on the sword. "Whosoever takes up this blade shall wield power eternal. Just as th' blade rends flesh, so must power scar th' spirit." The dwarf leaped to his feet, looking more agitated than Arthas had ever seen him. "Och, I should've known. Th' blade is cursed! Let's get the hell out of here!" Arthas's heart gave a strange wrench at Muradin's exclamation. Leave? Leave this sword behind, hovering in its frozen prison, untouched, unused, with such vast power to offer him? "Power eternal," the inscription had promised, along with the threat of scarring the spirit. "My spirit is already scarred," Arthas said. And so it was. It had been scarred by the needless death of a beloved steed, by the horror of watching the dead rise, by the betrayal of one he loved-yes, he had loved Jaina Proudmoore, he could say it now in this moment where his soul seemed to lie naked in front of the sword's judgment. It had been scarred by being forced to slaughter hundreds, by the need to lie to his men and forever silence those who would question and disobey him. It had been scarred by so very much. Surely the marks left by the power to right a horrible wrong could not be greater than these. "Arthas, lad," Muradin said, his rough voice pleading. "Ye've enough tae deal wi' without bringing a curse on yer head." "A curse?" Arthas laughed bitterly. "I would gladly bear any curse to save my homeland." Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Muradin shiver. "Arthas, ye ken I'm a solid one, no given tae flights o' fancy. But I tell ye, this is bad business, lad. Leave it be. Let it stay here, lost and forgotten. Mal'Ganis is here, well, that's fine. Let him freeze his demonic arse here in the wilderness. Forget this business and let's lead your men home." An image of the men suddenly filled Arthas's mind. He saw them, and beside them he saw the hundreds that had already fallen to this horrible plague. Fallen only to rise, unthinking rotting hunks of flesh. What of them? What of their souls, their suffering, their sacrifice? Another image appeared -a huge piece of ice, the same ice that now encased Frostmourne. He saw now where this chunk of ice had come from. It was part of something larger, stronger-and it, with the runeblade inside it, had been somehow sent to him to avenge those who had fallen. A voice whispered in his mind: The dead demand vengeance. What was a handful of living men compared to the torment of those who
had fallen in so horrible a fashion? "Damn the men!" The words seemed to explode from someplace deep in his gut. "I have a duty to the dead. Nothing shall prevent me from having my revenge, old friend." Now he tore his gaze away from the sword long enough to meet Muradin's worried gaze, and his face softened slightly. "Not even you." "Arthas-I taught ye tae fight. I wanted tae help ye be a good warrior as well as a good king. But part o' being a good warrior is picking which battles tae fight-and which weapons tae fight wi'." He stabbed a stubby forefinger at Frostmourne. "And that's a weapon ye'll nae want to be putting in your arsenal." Arthas put both hands up against the ice that was the sword's sheath and brought his face to within an inch of the smooth surface. As if from somewhere far away, he heard Muradin still speaking. "Listen tae me, lad. We'll find another way tae save yer people. Let's leave now, go back and find that way." Muradin was wrong. He simply didn't understand. Arthas had to do this. If he walked away now, he would have failed, again, and he couldn't let that happen. He had been thwarted at every turn. Not this time. He believed in the Light, because he could see it and had used it, and he believed in ghosts and the walking dead, because he had fought them. But until this moment, he had scoffed at the idea of unseen powers, of spirits of places or things. But now, his heart racing in anticipation and with a yearning, a craving that seemed to gnaw at his very soul, the words came from his lips as if of their own accord, laced with his dreadful wanting. "Now, I call out to the spirits of this place," he said, his breath frosting in the cold, still air. Just beyond his reach, Frostmourne hung, suspended, awaiting him. "Whatever you be, good or ill or neither or both. I can feel you here. I know you are listening. I'm ready. I understand. And I tell you now- I will give anything, or pay any price, if only you will help me save my people." For a long, terrible moment, nothing happened. His breath frosted, faded, frosted again, and cold sweat dotted his brow. He had offered everything he had-had he been refused? Had he failed yet again? And then with a low groan that made his breath catch, a sudden crack ran up the smooth surface of the ice. It raced its way upward, zigzagging and
spreading, until Arthas could barely glimpse the sword it held within its heart. Then he was stumbling backward, clutching his ears at the sudden loud cracking noise that filled the chamber. The icy casket encasing the sword exploded. Shards flew across the chamber, swords themselves, sharp and jagged. They shattered against the unyielding stone floor and walls, but even as Arthas dropped to his knees, his arms flying up automatically to cover his head, he heard a cry suddenly cut off. "Muradin!" The impact of the ice shard had knocked the dwarf back several feet. Now he lay sprawled on the cold stone floor, a spear of ice impaling his midsection, the blood sluggishly flowing around it. His eyes were closed and he was limp. Arthas scrambled to his feet and hastened over to his old friend and trainer, tugging off his gauntlet. He slipped an arm around the limp form, placing his hand on the wound, staring at it, willing the Light to come and limn his hands with healing energy. Guilt racked him. So this was the dreadful price. Not his own life, but that of a friend. Someone who had cared for him, taught him, supported him. He bowed his head, tears stinging his eyes, and prayed. It's my folly. My price. Please- And then, like a familiar caress from a loved friend, he felt it. The Light raced through him, comforting and warm, and he bit back a sob as he saw the glow again begin to embrace his hand. He had fallen so far, but it wasn't too late. The Light had not abandoned him. All he needed to do was drink it in, open his heart to it. Muradin would not die. He could heal him, and together they- Something stirred at the back of his neck. No, no, not the back of his neck...the back of his mind. He looked up quickly- And stared in wonder. It had flung itself free to imbed itself in front of him, its blue-white runes enveloping it in a cold and glorious light. His own Light faded from his hands as he rose to his feet, almost hypnotized. Frostmourne was waiting for him, a lover needing the touch of the desired one to waken to full glory. The whispering in the back of his mind continued. This was the path. It was foolish to trust in the Light. It had failed him, repeatedly. It had not been there to save Invincible, had not been enough to stop the inexorable march of this plague that was on its way to wiping out the population of his kingdom.
The power, the strength of Frostmourne-that was the only thing that could stand against the might of a dreadlord. Muradin was a casualty of this awful war. But hopefully, his sacrifice would be the last. Arthas got to his feet and took unsteady steps toward the radiant weapon, his hand, still wet with the blood of his friend, outstretched and trembling. It closed on the shaft and his fingers curled around it, fitting it perfectly, as if the one was made for the other. Cold shot through him, shivering up his arms, spreading over his body and into his heart. It was painful for a moment and he knew a hint of alarm, and then suddenly it was all right. It was all all right; Frostmourne was his and he was its, and its voice was speaking, whispering, caressing inside his mind as if it had always been there. With a cry of joy, he lifted the weapon, gazing at it in wonder and fierce pride. He would make things right-he, Arthas Menethil, and the glorious Frostmourne that was now as much a part of him as his mind or his heart or his breath, and he listened intently to the secrets it revealed.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Arthas and his men ran toward the encampment to discover that the battle had not abated in his absence. The numbers of his men had dwindled, but there were no corpses. He did not expect to see any-those who fell rose as adversaries, under the command of the dreadlord. Falric, his armor spattered with gore, cried out to him. "Prince Arthas! We've done what we could and-Where is Muradin? We can't hold out any longer!" "Muradin is dead," Arthas said. The cold but comforting essence of the sword seemed to abate a little, and pain swelled in his heart. Muradin had paid the price-but it was worth it, if it would fell Mal'Ganis. The dwarf would have agreed, had he known everything, understood as Arthas understood. Muradin's men looked stricken even as they continued to fire round after round into the waves of undead that continued to pound against them. "His death was not in vain. Take heart, Captain. The enemy will not stand long against the might of Frostmourne!" As they watched, disbelief washing over their faces, Arthas charged into the fray. He had thought he fought well with his blessed hammer, now lying discarded and forgotten in the icy vault where Frostmourne had once been imprisoned, but it was nothing to the damage he dealt now. Frostmourne felt more like an extension of himself rather than a weapon. He quickly found a rhythm and began to slice the undead down as if they were so many stalks of grain falling before the harvesting scythe. How balanced and perfect a weapon it was in his hands. One arcing blow severed the head from the shoulders of a ghoul. He swept Frostmourne around, scattering the bones of a skelton. Another rhythmic stroke downed a third foe. They fell all around him, the rotting bodies beginning to pile up, as he cut a path through them. At one point, looking for his next enemy, he caught sight of Falric staring at him. There was awe on the familiar face, but also shock and-horror? Only at the carnage he was wreaking, surely. Frostmourne was all but singing in his
hands. The wind picked up and the snow began to fall, thick and fast. Frostmourne seemed to approve, for the increased snowfall did not seem to hamper Arthas in the slightest. Again and again the blade found its mark, and more and more undead things fell. At last, the minions had been dealt with. It was time for their master. "Mal'Ganis, you coward!" Arthas cried, even his voice sounding different in his own ears now, as it carried easily over the howling wind. "Come show yourself! You taunted me into coming here, now stand and face me!" And then the demon lord was there, bigger than Arthas remembered, smirking down at the prince. He straightened to his full imposing height, his wing beating the air, his tail lashing. The undead warriors at his command stilled as he casually flicked a finger. Arthas was prepared for the dreadlord's frightening appearance this time. It did not rattle him. Staring at his enemy, he wordlessly lifted Frostmourne, and the runes etched along its length gleamed. Mal'Ganis recognized the weapon and a hint of a frown curved his blue lips. "So, you've taken up Frostmourne at the expense of your comrades' lives, just as the Dark Lord said you would. You're stronger than I thought." The words were heard, but there were other words, whispering silkily in his brain. Arthas listened, and then grinned fiercely. "You waste your breath, Mal'Ganis. I heed only the voice of Frostmourne now." The dreadlord threw back his horned head and laughed. "You hear the voice of the Dark Lord," Mal'Ganis retorted. He pointed a sharp, black-nailed finger at the mighty runeblade. "He whispers to you through the blade you wield!" Arthas felt the blood drain from his face. The dreadlord's master...spoke to him through Frostmourne? But...how could that be? Was this the final trick? Had he been gulled and delivered directly into Mal'Ganis's taloned hands? "What does he say, young human?" The smirk came again, the expression of one who knows something another does not. The dreadlord was gloating, reveling in this twist. "What does the Dark Lord of the Dead tell you now?" The whispers came again, but this time it was Arthas who smirked, a
mirror image of the same expression the dreadlord bore. Now it was he who knew something Mal'Ganis did not. Arthas whirled Frostmourne over his head, the enormous blade light and graceful in his hands, and then he eased into an attack position. "He tells me that the time for my vengeance has come." The green, glowing eyes widened. "What? He can't possibly mean to-" Arthas charged. The mighty runeblade lifted, descended. The dreadlord was taken by surprise, but only for an instant, and managed to get his staff up in time to deflect the blow. He leaped aside, great bat wings creating a quick gust of wind that blew Arthas's golden hair about wildly but did not affect his balance or speed. He came in again and again, coldly in control but swift and deadly as a viper, the blade glowing with eagerness. A brief thought crossed his mind: Frostmourne hungers. And a part of him responded with a frisson of fear: Hungers for what? It did not matter. He, Arthas, hungered for revenge, and he was going to have it. Every time Mal'Ganis tried to cast a spell, Frostmourne was there, knocking him aside, slicing his flesh, harrying him until the moment came when the deathblow would be dealt. He felt Frostmourne's anticipation, its craving, and he cried out as he swung the runeblade in a shimmering blue arc to neatly carve a deadly furrow across Mal'Ganis's midsection. Dark blood spurted in an arc, pattering on the snow, as the dreadlord fell. There was astonishment on his face; even at the end, he had not believed he could be defeated. For a moment Arthas stood, the wind and snow writhing about him, the glow of the runes on Frostmourne's blade, partially obscured by dark demonic blood, illuminating the glorious scene. "It is finished," he said softly. This part of your journey, yes, young prince, Frostmourne whispered-or was it truly the Dark Lord Mal'Ganis had spoken of? He did not know or care. Carefully he bent and wiped the blade clean in the snow. But there is more. So much more. So much power that could be yours. So much knowledge and control. Arthas remembered Muradin's reading of the inscription. His hand went to his heart without his immediately realizing it. The blade was part of him now, and he was part of it. The snowstorm was becoming worse. He realized with dawning surprise
that he was not at all cold. He straightened, holding Frostmourne, and looked about him. The demon lay stiffening at his feet. The voice-Frostmourne's, or the mysterious Dark Lord's-was right. There was more. So much more. And the winter would teach it. Arthas Menethil clutched the runeblade, gazed out into the snowstorm, and ran to embrace it all.
 
Arthas knew he would remember the bells all his life. They were rung only on occasions of great state import-a royal wedding, the birth of an heir, the funeral of a king, all the things that marked passages in the life of a kingdom. But today, they were being rung in celebration. He, Arthas Menethil, had returned home. He had sent word ahead of his triumph. Of discovering who had been behind the plague. Of searching him out. Of slaying him, and of this day, his glorious return to his place of birth. As he strode along the road toward Capital City, on foot, he was greeted with cheers and applause, the grateful outpouring of thanks of a nation saved from disaster by their beloved prince. He accepted this as his due, but his mind was on seeing his father after so long. "I would speak with you in private, Father, and tell you of the things I have learned and seen," he had written into his letter, delivered a few days earlier by a swift courier. "You have, I am certain, spoken with Jaina and Uther. I can imagine what they have said-tried to turn you against me. I assure you I have only done what I believe to be the greatest good for the citizens of Lordaeron. In the end, I have destroyed the one who began this plague upon our people, and I return home victorious, eager to begin a new era for our kingdom." Those who marched behind him were as silent as he, their faces as cowled. The crowd did not seem to require their response to wildly celebrate their return. The mighty drawbridge was lowered and Arthas strode across it. The cheering throngs were here, too, no longer comprised of commoners, but of diplomats, lesser nobility, visiting dignitaries from the elves, dwarves, and gnomes. They stood not just in the courtyard but also above it in viewing boxes. Rose petals, pink and white and red, rained down upon the land's returning hero.
Arthas remembered that once, he had thought to see Jaina standing before him on their wedding day, the petals falling upon a face lit with a smile, turned up to kiss him. Jaina... Moved by the image, he caught one of the red petals in a gloved hand. He thumbed it thoughtfully, and then frowned as a stain appeared. It grew before his eyes, desiccating and destroying the petal, until it was more brown than red in his palm. With a quick, dismissive gesture, he tossed the dead thing away and continued. He pushed open the huge doors to the throne room he knew so well, strode forward, glanced at Terenas briefly, and threw his father a smile that was mostly hidden by the cowl. Arthas knelt in obeisance, Frostmourne held before him, its tip touching the seal carved into the stone floor. "Ah, my son. Glad I am to see you safely home," Terenas said, rising somewhat unsteadily. Terenas looked unwell, Arthas thought. The incidents of the last several months had aged the monarch. His hair was grayer now, his eyes tired. But it was all going to be all right now. You no longer need to sacrifice for your people. You no longer need to bear the weight of your crown. I've taken care of everything. Arthas rose, his armor clattering with the movement. He lifted a hand and drew back the hood from his face, watching for his father's reaction. Terenas's eyes widened as he took in the change that had come over his only son. Arthas's hair, once golden as the wheat that had given sustenance to his people, was now bone-white. He knew his face was pale as well, as if the blood had been drained from it. It is time, Frostmourne whispered in his mind. Arthas moved toward his father, who had halted on the dais, staring, uncertain. There were several guards positioned about the room, but they would be no match against him, Frostmourne, and the two who had accompanied him. Arthas strode boldly up the carpeted steps and seized his father by the arm. Arthas drew back his blade. Frostmourne's runes brightened in anticipation. And then a whisper, not from the runeblade, but a memory- -the voice of a dark-haired prince, seemingly from another lifetime ago - "He was assassinated. A trusted friend...she killed him. Stabbed him
right in the heart..." Arthas shook his head and the voice was silenced. "What is this? What are you doing, my son?" "Succeeding you...Father." And Frostmourne's hunger was sated-for the moment.
 
Arthas turned them loose then-his new, unquestioning, obedient subjects. Dispatching the guards who charged him upon the death of his father was a simple matter, and he stormed with cold purpose back out into the courtyard. It was madness. What had once been revelry had now become frenzy. What had once been celebration had now become a frantic flight for life. Few escaped. Most of those who had waited for hours in line to welcome their prince back now lay dead, blood congealing from hideous wounds, limbs ripped off, bodies broken. Ambassadors now lay with commoners, men and women with children, all hideously equal in death. Arthas did not care what their eventual fate was-carrion for the crows, or new subjects to follow his rule. He would leave that to his captains, Falric and Marwyn, as bone-white as he and twice as merciless. Arthas marched through the way he had come, focused and intent upon one single thing. Once clear of the courtyard and the corpses, animated or still, he broke into a run. No horse would bear him now; the beasts grew frantic at the smell of him and those who followed him. But he had found that he did not tire; not when Frostmourne, or the Lich King who spoke to him through the runeblade, was whispering to him. And so he ran swiftly, his legs carrying him to a place he had not been in years. Voices swirled in his head, memories, snippets of conversations: "You know you were not supposed to ride him yet." "You missed your lessons. Again..." Invincible's horrible screams of agony, echoing in his mind. The Light, pausing for that awful moment, as if deciding whether or not he was worthy of its grace. Jaina's face as he ended their relationship. "Listen to me, boy.... The shadow has already fallen, and nothing you do will deter it.... The harder you strive to slay your enemies, the faster you'll deliver your people into their hands...." "...This isn't a blighted apple crop; this is a city full of human beings!..."
"...We know so little-we can't just slaughter them like animals out of our own fear!" "Ye lied tae yer men and betrayed the mercenaries who fought for ye!... That's nae King Terenas's boy." But they were the ones who could not see, could not grasp. Jaina-Uther -Terenas-Muradin. All of them, at some point, by word or look, had told him he had been wrong. He slowed his pace as he came to the farmstead. His subjects had been here before him, and now there were only corpses lying, stiffening in the earth. Arthas steeled himself against the pain that recognition brought with it even now; they had been the lucky ones, to simply die. A man, a woman, a youth his own age. And the snapdragons...blooming like mad this year, it would seem. Arthas stepped close and extended a hand to touch one of the beautiful, tall, lavender-blue flowers, then hesitated, remembering the rose petal. He had not come here for flowers. He turned and strode to a grave, nearly seven years old now. Grass had overtaken it, but the marker was still readable. He did not need to read it to know what lay here. For a moment he stood, more moved by the death of the one in this grave than by that of his own father, by his own hand. The power is yours, came the whispers. Do as you will. Arthas extended one hand, Frostmourne firmly gripped in the other. Dark light began to swirl around the outstretched hand, increasing in speed. It moved from his fingers like a serpent, undulating and writhing of its own accord, and then it speared down into the earth. Arthas felt it connect with the skeleton below. Joy flooded him, and tears stung his eyes. He lifted his hand, pulling the no-longer-dead thing from its seven-year slumber in the cool dark earth. "Arise!" he commanded, the word bursting from his throat. The grave erupted, showering bits of earth. Bony legs pawed, hooves seeking purchase on the shifting soil, and a skull thrust upward, breaking the surface. Arthas watched breathlessly, a smile on his too-pale face. I saw you being born, he thought, remembering a membrane enshrouding a wriggling, wet, new little life. I helped you come into this world, and I helped you leave it...and now by my hand, you are reborn. The skeletal steed struggled through the earth and finally emerged,
planting its forelegs firmly and hoisting itself up. Red fire burned in its empty eye sockets. It tossed its head, pranced and somehow whinnied, though its soft tissue had long since rotted away. Trembling, Arthas extended a hand to the undead creature, who whickered and nuzzled his hand with its bony muzzle. Seven years ago, he had ridden this horse to its death. Seven years ago, he had wept tears that had frozen on his face as he lifted his sword and stabbed the beloved beast straight through its gallant heart. He had carried the guilt of that act alone all this time. But now he realized -it was all part of his destiny. If he had not slain his steed, he could not now bring it back. Alive, the horse would have feared him. Undead as it was, with fire for eyes, its bones held together by the necromantic magic that Arthas now could wield thanks to the gift of the mysterious Lich King, horse and rider could at last be reunited, as they had always been meant to be. It hadn't been a mistake, seven years ago; he hadn't been wrong. Not then, not now. Not ever. And this was proof. Throughout the land that he now ruled, his father's blood still slick and crimson on Frostmourne, death was coming. The change. "This kingdom shall fall," he promised his beloved steed as he threw his cloak over its bony back and mounted. "And from the ashes shall arise a new order that will shake the very foundation of the world!" The horse whickered. Invincible.
PART THREE
THE DARK LADY
INTERLUDE
Sylvanas Windrunner, former ranger-general of Quel'Thalas, banshee, and Dark Lady of the Forsaken, strode from the royal quarters with the same quick, lithe stride she had had in life. She preferred her corporeal form for ordinary, everyday activities. Her leather boots made no sound on the stone floor of the Undercity, but all heads turned to watch their lady. She was unique and unmistakable. Once, her hair had been golden, her eyes blue, her skin the color of a fresh peach. Once, she had been alive. Now her hair, often covered by a blueblack cowl, was black as midnight with white streaks and her formerly peachhued skin a faint, pearly blue-gray. She'd chosen to don the armor she had worn in life, well-tooled leather that revealed most of her slender but muscular torso. Her ears twitched at the murmurings; she did not often venture forth from her chambers. She was ruler of this city, and the world came to her. Beside her hurried Master Apothecary Faranell, head of the Royal Apothecary Society, who was talking animatedly and simpering. "I am most grateful you agreed to come, my lady," he said, trying to bow and walk and speak at the same time. "You did say you wished to be informed when the experiments were successful, and you wanted to see them yourself once we -" "I am well aware of my own orders, Doctor," Sylvanas snapped as they began to descend a winding corridor into the bowels of the Undercity. "Of course, of course. Here we are." They emerged into a room that to one with weaker sensibilities would seem like a house of horrors. On a large table, a stooped undead was busily sewing together pieces of different corpses, humming a little under his breath. Sylvanas smiled slightly. "It is good to see someone who enjoys his work so," she replied a trifle archly. The apprentice started slightly, and then bowed deeply. There was a low buzz of some kind of energy crackling. Other alchemists bustled about, mixing potions, weighing ingredients, jotting notes. The smell
was a combination of putrefaction, chemicals, and, incongruously, the clean sweet smell of certain herbs. Sylvanas was startled by her reaction. The scent of the herbs made her oddly...homesick. Fortunately, the softer emotion did not last long. Such emotions never did. "Show me," she demanded. Faranell bowed and ushered her through the main area, past pieces of bodies hanging on hooks, into a side room. The faint sound of sobbing reached her ears. As she entered, Sylvanas saw several cages on the floor or swinging slowly from chains, all of them filled with test subjects. Some were human. Some were Forsaken. All were dull-eyed with fear that had pierced so deep and had gone on so long that they were almost numb. They would not be so for much longer. "As you can imagine, my lady," Faranell was saying, "it is difficult to transport Scourge as test subjects. Of course for experimental purposes, Forsaken are identical to Scourge. But I am delighted to report that our tests in the field have been well documented and quite successful." Excitement began to stir in Sylvanas, and she graced the apothecary with a rare and still beautiful smile. "That pleases me greatly," she said. The undead doctor fairly quivered in delight. He beckoned to his assistant Keever, a Forsaken whose brain had obviously been damaged by his first death and who muttered to himself in the third person as he removed two test subjects. One was a human woman, who was apparently not so lost in fear and despair as not to start weeping silently when Keever dragged her from her cage. The Forsaken male, however, was utterly impassive and stood quietly. Sylvanas eyed him. "Criminal?" "Of course, my lady." She wondered if it were true. But in the end, it didn't matter. He would serve the Forsaken, even so. The human girl was on her knees. Keever stooped down, yanked her head up by her hair, and when she opened her mouth to cry out in pain, he poured a cup of something down her throat and covered her mouth, forcing her to swallow. Sylvanas watched while she struggled. Beside her, the Forsaken male accepted the cup that Faranell offered without protest, draining it dry. It happened quickly. The human girl soon stopped struggling, her body tensing, and then going into paroxysms. Keever let her go, watching almost curiously as blood began to stream from her mouth, nose, eyes, and ears. Sylvanas turned her gaze to the Forsaken. He still regarded her steadily,
silently. She began to frown. "Perhaps this is not as effective as your-" The Forsaken shuddered. He struggled to stand erect for a moment longer, but his rapidly weakening body betrayed him and he stumbled, falling hard. Everyone stepped back. Sylvanas watched raptly, her lips parted in excitement. "The same strain?" she asked Faranell. The human female whimpered once and then was still, her eyes open. The alchemist nodded happily. "Indeed it is," he said. "As you can imagine, we are quite-" The undead spasmed, his skin breaking open in spots and weeping black ichor, and then he, too, was still. "-pleased with the results." "Indeed," Sylvanas said. She was hard put to conceal her own elation; "pleased" was a pale word indeed. "A plague that kills both humans and Scourge. And, obviously, affects my own people as well, as they, too, are undead." She gave him a look from glowing silver eyes. "We must take care that this never falls into the wrong hands. The results could be...devastating." He gulped. "Indeed, my lady, indeed they could." She forced a neutral expression as she returned to the royal quarters. Her mind was racing with a thousand things, but foremost among them, burning as brightly and wildly as the wicker man she lit every Hallow's End, was a single thought: At last, Arthas, you will pay for what you have done. The humans who spawned such as you shall be slaughtered. Your Scourge shall be stopped in their tracks. You will no longer be able to hide behind your armies of mindless undead puppets. And we will grace you with the same mercy and compassion you showed us. Despite her great control, she found herself smiling.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
It was, Arthas mused as he rode upon the back of the skeletal, faithful Invincible toward Andorhal, a truly great irony that he who had slain the necromancer Kel'Thuzad was now charged with resurrecting him. Frostmourne whispered to him, although he did not need the voice of the sword-the voice of the Lich King, as he desired to be known-to reassure him. There was no going back. Nor did he wish to. After the fall of Capital City, Arthas had retreated into a dark version of a paladin's pilgrimage. He had ridden the length and breadth of his land, bringing his new subjects to town after town and unleashing them upon the populace. He thought the Scourge, which Kel'Thuzad had called them, a fitting name. The instrument of self-flagellation of the same name, sometimes used by some of the more fringe elements of the priesthood, was meant to cleanse impurities. His Scourge would cleanse the land of the living. He stood straddling the worlds; he was alive after a fashion, but the Lich King's soft whispers were calling him death knight, and the leeching of color from his hair and skin and eyes seemed to indicate that it was more than a title. He did not know; he did not care. He was the Lich King's favored, and the Scourge was his to command, and in a strange, twisted way, he found that he cared for them. Arthas now served the Lich King through one of his sergeants, a dreadlord, almost identical in form to Mal'Ganis. This, too, was irony; this, too, did not distress him. "Like Mal'Ganis, I am a dreadlord. But I am not your enemy," Tichondrius had reassured him. The lips twisted in a smile that was more of a sneer. "In truth, I've come to congratulate you. By killing your own father and delivering this land to the Scourge, you have passed your first test. The Lich King is pleased with your...enthusiasm." Arthas felt buffeted by twin emotions-pain and exultation. "Yes," he said, keeping his voice steady in front of the demon, "I've damned everyone and everything I've ever loved in his name, and I still feel
no remorse. No pity. No shame." And in his heart of hearts, there came another whisper, but not from Frostmourne: Liar. He forced the sentiment down. That voice would be silenced, somehow. He could not afford to permit the softness to grow. It was like gangrene; it would eat him, if he let it. Tichondrius seemed not to notice. He pointed to Frostmourne. "The runeblade you carry was forged by my kind, long ago. The Lich King has empowered it to steal souls. Yours was the first one it claimed." Emotions warred within Arthas. He stared at the blade. Tichondrius's word choice had not escaped him. Stolen. Had the Lich King asked for his soul in exchange for saving his people, Arthas would have given it. But the Lich King had asked no such thing; he had simply taken it. And now it was there, locked inside the glowing weapon, so close to Arthas that the prince- the king-could almost, but not quite, touch it. And had Arthas even gotten what he had set out to get? Had his people been saved? Did it matter? Tichondrius watched him closely. "Then I'll make do without one," Arthas said lightly. "What is the Lich King's will?" It had been, it turned out, to rally what was left of the Cult of the Damned in order to have aid for a greater undertaking-the recovery of Kel'Thuzad's remains. They lay, he had been told, in Andorhal, where Arthas himself had left them, a puddle of reeking, decaying flesh. Andorhal, where the shipments of plagued grain had come from. He recalled his fury as he had attacked the necromancer, but felt it no longer. A smile curved his pale lips. Irony. The buildings that had once been a conflagration were now charred timbers. No one save the undead should be here now...and yet...Arthas frowned, drawing rein. Invincible halted, as obedient in death as he had been in life. Arthas could glimpse figures moving about. What little light there was on this dim day glinted off- "Armor," he said. There were armored men stationed about the perimeter of the cemetery and one near a small tomb. He squinted, and then his eyes widened. Not just living beings, not just warriors, but paladins. And he knew why they were here. Kel'Thuzad, it seemed, drew the interest of many. But he had dissolved the order. There shouldn't be any paladins, let alone gathered here. Frostmourne whispered; it was hungry. Arthas drew the
mighty runeblade, lifted it so the little army of acolytes who accompanied him could see and be inspired by it, and charged. Invincible sprang forward, and Arthas saw the shock on the faces of the cemetery's guardians as he bore down on them. They fought valiantly, but in the end, it was futile; and they knew it, he could see it in their eyes. He had just tugged Frostmourne free, feeling the sword's joy in taking another soul, when a voice cried, "Arthas!" It was a voice Arthas had heard before, but he couldn't quite place it. He turned toward the speaker. The man was tall and imposing. He had removed his helm, and it was the thick beard that jogged Arthas's memory. "Gavinrad," he said, surprised. "It has been a long time." "Not long enough. Where is the hammer we gifted you with?" Gavinrad said, almost spitting the words. "The weapon of a paladin. A weapon of honor." Arthas remembered. It had been this man who had placed the hammer at his feet. How clean, how pure, how simple it had all seemed then. "I have a better weapon now," Arthas said. He lifted Frostmourne. It seemed to pulse eagerly in his hand. A whim struck him, and he obeyed it. "Stand aside, brother," he said, an odd gentleness tingeing his voice. "I've come to collect some old bones. For the sake of that day, and for the order to which we both belonged, you will not come to harm if you let me pass." Gavinrad's bushy brows drew together and he spat in Arthas's direction. "I can't believe that we ever called you brother! Why Uther ever vouched for you is beyond me. Your betrayal has broken Uther's heart, boy. He would have given his life for yours in a second, and this is how you repay his loyalty? I knew it was a mistake to accept a spoiled prince into our order! You've made a mockery of the Silver Hand!" Fury rose in Arthas, so swift and so intense he almost choked on it. How dare he! Arthas was a death knight, the hand of the Lich King. Life, death, and unlife-all fell within his purview. And Gavinrad spat upon his offer of safety. Arthas gritted his teeth. "No, my brother," he growled softly. "When I slay your body and raise it as my servant, and make you dance to my tune, that, Gavinrad, will be a mockery of the Silver Hand." Grinning, he beckoned tauntingly. The undead and the cultists who had accompanied him waited silently. Gavinrad did not rush in, but gathered
himself, praying to the Light that would not save him. Arthas let him complete his prayer, let his weapon glow, as Arthas's own hammer had once done. With Frostmourne gripped tightly in his hand and the Lich King's powers surging through his dead-not-dead body, he knew that Gavinrad did not stand a chance. Nor did he. The paladin fought with everything he had, but it was not enough. Arthas toyed with him a little, easing the sting that Gavinrad's words had caused, but soon tired of the game and dispatched his erstwhile brother in arms with a single mighty sword blow. He felt Frostmourne take in and obliterate yet another soul, and shivered slightly as Gavinrad's lifeless body fell to the earth. Despite what he had promised his now-vanquished foe, Arthas let him stay dead. With a curt gesture he ordered his servants to begin retrieving the corpse. He had left Kel'Thuzad to rot where he had fallen, but someone, doubtless the necromancer's devout followers, had cared enough to put the body in a small crypt. The acolytes of the Cult of the Damned now rushed forward, finding the tomb and with effort pushing aside the lid. Inside was a coffin, which was quickly lifted out. Arthas nudged it with his foot, grinning a little. "Come along now, necromancer," he said teasingly as the casket was borne into the back of a vehicle referred to as a "meat wagon." "The powers that you once served have need of you again." "Told you my death would mean little." Arthas started. He had become somewhat accustomed to hearing voices; the Lich King, through Frostmourne, whispered to him almost constantly now. But this was something different. He recognized the voice; he had heard it before, but arrogant and taunting, not confidential and conspiratorial. Kel'Thuzad. "What the...am I hearing ghosts now?" Not only hearing them. Seeing them. Or one specific ghost, at least. Kel'Thuzad's shape slowly formed before his eyes, translucent and hovering, the eyes dark holes. But it was unmistakably him, and the spectral lips curved in a knowing smile. "I was right about you, Prince Arthas." "It took you long enough." The bass, angry rumble of Tichondrius seemed to come out of nowhere, and the specter-if it had indeed actually been there-disappeared. Arthas was shaken. Had he imagined it? Was he starting to lose his sanity along with his soul?
Tichondrius had not noticed anything and continued, removing the casket and peering disgustedly inside at the nearly-liquefied corpse of Kel'Thuzad. Arthas found the stench more tolerable than he had expected, though it was still horrific. It seemed like a lifetime ago he had struck at the necromancer with his hammer and watched the too-rapid decomposition of the newly dead man. "These remains are badly decomposed. They will never survive the trip to Quel'Thalas." Arthas seized on the distraction. "Quel'Thalas?" The golden land of the elves... "Yes. Only the energies of the high elves' Sunwell can bring Kel'Thuzad back to life." The dreadlord's frown deepened. "And with each moment, he decays further. You must steal a very special urn from the paladin's keeping. They are bearing it here now. Place the necromancer's remains within it, and he will be well protected for the journey." The dreadlord was smirking. There was more to this than at first was apparent. Arthas opened his mouth to inquire, then closed it. Tichondrius would not tell him anyway. He shrugged, mounted Invincible, and rode where he was told. Behind him, he heard the demon's dark laughter.
 
Tichondrius had been right. Moving slowly along the road, on foot, was a small funeral procession. A military funeral, or one for an important dignitary; Arthas recognized the trappings of such things. Several men in armor marched single file; one man in the center carried something in powerful arms. The faint sun glinted on his armor and upon the item he bore -the urn of which Tichondrius had spoken. And suddenly Arthas understood why Tichondrius had been amused. The paladin's carriage was distinctive, his armor unique, and Arthas gripped Frostmourne with hands that had suddenly become slightly unsteady. He forced the myriad, confusing, unsettling sensations down, and ordered his men to approach. The funeral party was not large, though it was filled with fighters of distinction, and it was an easy matter to completely surround them. They drew their weapons, but did not attack, turning instead for instructions to the man who bore the urn. Uther-for it could be no one else, seemed completely in control as he regarded his former student. His face was impassive, but
more lined than Arthas remembered. His eyes, however, burned with righteous fury. "The dog returns to his vomit," Uther said, the words cracking like a whip. "I'd prayed you'd stay away." Arthas twitched slightly. His voice was rough as he replied, "I'm a bad copper-I just keep turning up. I see you still call yourself a paladin, even though I dissolved your order." Uther actually laughed, though it was bitter laughter. "As if you could dissolve it yourself. I answer to the Light, boy. So did you, once." The Light. He still remembered it. His heart lurched in his chest and for a moment, just a moment, he lowered the sword. Then the whispers came, reminding him of the power he now bore, emphasizing that walking the path of the Light had not gotten him what he craved. Arthas gripped Frostmourne firmly once more. "I did many things, once," he retorted. "No longer." "Your father ruled this land for fifty years, and you've ground it to dust in a matter of days. But undoing and destruction is easy, isn't it?" "Very dramatic, Uther. Pleasant as this is, I've no time to reminisce. I've come for the urn. Give it to me, and I'll make sure you die quickly." No sparing this one. Not even if he begged. Especially not if he begged. There was too much history between them. Too much-feeling. Now Uther showed emotion other than anger. He stared at Arthas, aghast. "This urn holds your father's ashes, Arthas! What, were you hoping to piss on them one last time before you left his kingdom to rot?" A sudden jolt went through Arthas. Father- "I didn't know what it held," he murmured, as much to himself as to Uther. So this was the second reason the dreadlord had smirked as he had given Arthas his instructions. He, at least, had known what the urn contained. Test after test. Could Arthas fight his mentor...could he blaspheme his father's ashes. Arthas was growing sick of it. He harnessed that anger as he spoke, dismounting and drawing Frostmourne. "Nor does it matter. I'll take what I came for one way or another." Frostmourne was almost humming now, in his mind and in his hand, eager for the battle. Arthas settled into attack position. Uther regarded him for a moment, then slowly lifted his own glowing weapon. "I didn't want to believe it," he said, his voice gruff, and Arthas realized
with horror that tears stood in Uther's eyes. "When you were younger and selfish, I called it a child's failing. When you pushed on stubbornly, I dismissed it as a youth's need to move out from under his father's shadow. And Stratholme-aye, Light forgive me, even that-I prayed you would find your own path to see the error of your judgment. I could not stand against my liege's son." Arthas forced a smile as the two began to circle each other. "But now you do." "It was my last promise to your father. To my friend. I would see his remains treated with reverence, even after his own son brutally slaughtered him, unaware and unarmed." "You'll die for that promise." "Possibly." It didn't seem to bother Uther much. "I'd rather die honoring that promise than live at your mercy. I'm glad he's dead. I'm glad he doesn't have to see what you've become." The remark...hurt. Arthas hadn't expected it to. He paused, emotions warring within him, and Uther, ever the better in their bouts, used that brief hesitation to charge forward. "For the Light!" he cried, pulling the hammer back and swinging it at Arthas with all his strength. The gleaming weapon arced at Arthas so swiftly he could hear the sound of its movement. He leaped aside, barely in time, and felt the air brush his face as the weapon rushed past. Uther's expression was calm and focused...and deadly. It was his duty as he saw it to slay the betraying son, and stop the spread of evil. Just as Arthas knew it was his duty to slay the man who had once mentored him. He needed to kill his past...all of his past. Or else it would forever reach out with the deceptively sweet hope of compassion and forgiveness. With an incoherent cry, Arthas brought Frostmourne down. Uther's hammer blocked it. The two men strained, their faces within inches of each other, the muscles in their arms shaking with effort, until with a grunt Uther shoved Arthas backward. The younger man stumbled. Uther pressed the attack. His face was calm, but his eyes were fierce and resolute, and he seemed to fight as if his victory was inevitable. The utter confidence shook Arthas. His own blows were powerful, but erratic. He'd never been able to best Uther before- "It ends here, boy!" Uther cried, his voice ringing. Suddenly to Arthas's horror the paladin was limned in a glowing, brilliant light. Not just his
hammer, but his entire body, as if he himself was the true weapon of the Light that would strike Arthas down. "For the Light's justice!" The hammer descended. All the air in Arthas's body was knocked out of him with a rush as the blow landed straight and true across his midsection. Only his armor saved him, and even that crumpled beneath the glowing hammer wielded by the holy, radiant paladin. Arthas went sprawling, Frostmourne flying from his grip, agony shooting through him as he struggled to breathe, struggled to rise. The Light-he had turned his back on it, had betrayed it. And now it was exacting retribution through Uther the Lightbringer, its greatest champion, infusing his old teacher with the purity of its brilliance and purpose. The glow enveloping Uther increased, and Arthas grimaced in agony as the Light seared his eyes as well as his soul. He'd been wrong to forsake it, horribly wrong, and now its mercy and love had been transformed into this radiant, implacable being. He stared upward into the white light that was Uther's eyes, tears filling his own as he awaited the killing blow. Had he grasped the sword without realizing it, or had it leaped into his hands of its own volition? In the swirling mental chaos that was that moment, Arthas could not tell. All he knew was that suddenly, his hands were closing on Frostmourne's hilt, and its voice was in his mind. Every Light has its shadow-every day has its night-and even the brightest candle can be snuffed out. And so can the brightest life. He let out a gulping inhalation, sucking breath into his lungs, and for just a second, Arthas saw the Light enveloping Uther dim. Then Uther lifted the hammer again, ready to deal the killing blow. But Arthas was not there. If Uther was a bear, enormous and powerful, Arthas was a tiger, strong and coiled and swift. The hammer, strong and Light-blessed though it and its weilder might be, was not a fast weapon, nor was Uther's style of fighting. Frostmourne, however, though it was an enormous two handed runeblade, seemed to almost be able to fight on its own. He moved forward again, no hesitancy this time, and began to fight in earnest. He gave no quarter as he attacked Uther the Lightbringer; offered no moment's breathing space for the paladin to draw back the weapon to deliver a crushing blow. Uther's eyes widened with shock, then narrowed in determination. But the Light that had once surged so brightly from his
powerful frame was diminishing with each passing second. Diminishing before the power granted to him by the Lich King. Again and again Frostmourne landed-here on the hammer's glowing head, here on the shaft, here on Uther's shoulder, in that narrow space between gorget and shoulder pauldrons, biting deep- Uther grunted and staggered back. Blood poured from the wound. Frostmourne craved more, and Arthas wanted to give it more. Snarling like a beast, his white hair flying, he pressed the attack. The hammer, great and glowing, fell from Uther's nerveless fingers as Frostmourne nearly severed the arm. A blow dented Uther's breastplate; a second in the same spot cleaved it and tore at the flesh beneath. Uther's tabard, the blue and gold of the Alliance he had once fought for, fluttered to the snow-covered earth in pieces as Uther the Lightbringer fell heavily to his knees. He looked up. His breathing came with difficulty. Blood trickled from his mouth, seeping into his beard, but there was no hint of surrender on his face. "I dearly hope that there's a special place in hell waiting for you, Arthas." He coughed, the blood bubbling up. "We may never know, Uther," Arthas said coldly, lifting Frostmourne for the final blow. The sword nearly sang in anticipation. "I intend to live forever." He brought the runeblade straight down, through Uther's throat, silencing the defiant words, piercing the great heart. Uther died almost immediately. Arthas tugged the blade free and stepped back, shaking. Surely, it was only from the release of tension and exultation. He knelt and picked up the urn. He held it for a long moment, then slowly broke the seal and tipped the jar over, pouring out its contents. The ashes of King Terenas fell like gray rain, like plagued flour, drifting down onto the snow. Abruptly, the wind shifted. The gray powder that was all that was left of a king suddenly took flight, as if animated, whirling to shower the death knight. Startled, Arthas took a step backward. His hands automatically came up to shield his face, and he dropped the urn, which landed with a dull thunk on the ground. He shut his eyes and turned away, but not quickly enough, and began to cough violently, the ashes acrid and choking. Abruptly, panic seized him. His gauntleted hands came up to swipe at his face, trying to wipe off the fine powder that clogged his throat and nose and stung his eyes. He spat, and for a moment his stomach roiled.
Arthas took a deep breath and forced calm upon himself. A moment later, he rose, composed once again. If he felt anything at all, he had locked it so deep he did not know it. Stone-faced, he returned to the wagon that bore the reeking, nearly liquid remains of Kel'Thuzad and shoved it at one of the Scourge. "Put the necromancer in here," he ordered. He mounted Invincible. Quel'Thalas was not far.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
During the six days it took to reach the high elven lands, Arthas spoke with the shade of Kel'Thuzad and gathered many, many more to his side. From Andorhal eastward he went, the meat wagons grinding along in his wake, past the little hamlets of Felstone Field, Dalson's Orchard, and Gahrron's Quickening, across the Thondroril River into the eastern part of Lordaeron. Risen plague victims were everywhere, and a simple mental command brought them to heel like faithful hounds. Care of them was easy- they fed on the dead. It was very...tidy. These Arthas was expecting to come to his side; the plague victims, the abominations sewn together of many parts, the ghosts of the fallen. But a new ally joined him-one that startled, appalled, and then delighted him. His army was halfway to Quel'Thalas when he first saw them. Far in the distance, it first appeared as if the earth itself was moving. No, that wasn't right. These were beasts, of a sort. Cattle or sheep, that had broken out of their pens when their owners turned into the walking dead? Bears or wolves, foraging and feasting on corpses? And then Arthas gasped and grasped Frostmourne tightly, his eyes wide with shock and disbelief. They did not move like four-legged creatures. They scuttled, scurried, moving over the hills and grasses like- "Spiders," he murmured. Now they poured down the slopes, purple and black and dangerouslooking, multiple legs scurrying quickly to bear them to Arthas. They were coming for him-they- "These are the new warriors the Lich King sends to his favored one," came Kel'Thuzad's voice. The ghost apparently could be heard and seen only by Arthas, and he had been doing a great deal of talking in the last few days. He had recently focused on sowing the seeds of suspicion in the death knight's mind. Not of himself-of Tichondrius and the other demons. "The dreadlords cannot be trusted," he had said. "They are the Lich King's jailors. I will tell you all...when I walk this world again."
They had had enough time; Arthas wondered if Kel'Thuzad was dangling the information in front of him like bait, to ensure that Arthas completed the task. Now Arthas asked, "He sent these...to me? What are they?" "They once were nerubians," Kel'Thuzad said. "Descendants of an ancient and proud race called the aqir. In life, they were fiercly intelligent, their will dedicated to wiping out any who were not like themselves." Arthas eyed the arachnid creatures with a shiver of disgust. "Lovely. And now?" "Now, these are those who fell battling the one we serve. He has raised them and their lord, Anub'arak, into undeath, and now they come to aid you, Prince Arthas. To serve his glory and yours." "Undead spiders," Arthas mused. They were huge, hideous, deadly. They came chittering and scuttling, merging into step with the corpses, specters, and abominations. "To fight the elves of Quel'Thalas." This Lich King, whomever he was, had a flair for the dramatic. Arthas's coming, of course, was witnessed. The elves bred notoriously fine scouts. Chances were by the time Arthas himself noticed them, word had already gone ahead. It didn't matter. The force he had assembled had grown to a truly impressive size, and he had no doubt, despite Kel'Thuzad's fretful warnings, that he would be able to gain entry into the wondrous, eternal land, move through it swiftly, and reach the Sunwell. They had captured a prisoner, a young priest who in an act of defiance had inadvertently revealed some important information. Arthas would use the information wisely and well. Too, there was another, one who, unlike the priest, would willingly betray his people and their land for the power that Arthas and the Lich King had promised him. It surprised the death knight how readily this elven mage had turned. Surprised, and unsettled him. Arthas had once been loved by his people, as his father before him had been. He had enjoyed basking in the warm approval from those who served under him. He had taken time to learn their names, to listen to stories of their families. He had wanted them to love him. And they had, following him loyally, as Captain Falric had done. But Arthas had to assume that the elven leaders, too, loved their people. Assumed, as Arthas assumed, that they would stay loyal. And yet this mage had betrayed his people for nothing more than the mere promise of power, the simple, glittering allure of it.
Mortals could be corrupted. Mortals could be swayed, or bought. He looked over his current army and smiled. Yes...this was better. There was no question of loyalty when those he led could do nothing but obey.
 
"It is true," the scout gasped. "All of it." Sylvanas Windrunner, Ranger-General of Silvermoon, knew this elf well. Kelmarin's information was always accurate and detailed. She listened, wanting to disbelieve, knowing she did not dare. They had all heard the rumors, of course. That some sort of plague had begun to creep across the human lands. But the quel'dorei had thought themselves safe here in their homeland. It had withstood attacks from dragons, orcs, and trolls over the centuries. Surely, what was occurring in the human lands would not touch them. Except it had. "You are sure it is Arthas Menethil? The prince?" Kelmarin nodded, still catching his breath. "Aye, my lady. I heard him called so by those who served him. I do not think the rumors painting him as the slayer of his father and the instigator of the troubles in Lordaeron are exaggerations, from what I have seen." Sylvanas listened, her blue eyes widening, as the scout spun a tale that sounded too fantastical to be believed. Risen corpses, both fresh and desiccated. Enormous, mindless patchwork creations of various body parts; strange beasts who could fly and looked like stone creations come to life; giant spiderlike beings that reminded her of tales of the thought-vanished aqir. And the smell-Kelmarin, who was not given to exaggeration, spoke in halting tones about the reek that preceded the army. The forests, the first bastion of defense of the land, were falling beneath the strange engines of war he had brought with him. Sylvanas thought back to the red dragons, which had set the woods aflame not so very long ago. Silvermoon had endured, of course, but the woodlands had suffered terribly. As they were suffering now.... "My lady," Kelmarin finished, lifting his head and giving her a stricken gaze. "If he breaks through-I do not think we have the numbers to defeat him." The bitter statement gave her the anger she needed. "We are quel'dorei," she snapped, straightening. "Our land is impregnable. He will not enter. Do
not fear. He must first know how to break the enchantments that protect Quel'Thalas. Then he must be able to do so. Better and wiser foes than he have tried to take our realm ere now. Have faith, my friend. In the Sunwell's strength...and in the strength and will of our people." As Kelmarin was led off to where he could drink and eat and recover before returning to his post, Sylvanas turned to her rangers. "I would see this human prince for myself. Summon the first battle units. If Kelmarin is correct...we should prepare for a preemptive strike."
 
Sylvanas lay atop the great gate that, along with the jagged ring of mountains, helped protect her land. She wore full but comfortable leather armor, and her bow was slung across her back. She and Sheldaris and Vor'athil, the other two scouts who had gone on ahead and had waited for her to come with the bulk of the rangers, stared, aghast. As Kelmarin had warned, they had smelled the reek of the decaying army long before they had seen them. Prince Arthas rode atop a skeletal horse with fiery eyes, a huge sword that she recognized at once as a runeblade strapped to his back. Humans in dark clothing scurried to obey his commands. So did the dead. Sylvanas choked back bile as her gaze roved over the collection of various rotting corpses, and she was silently thankful that the wind had shifted and was now blowing the stench away from her. She signaled her plan, long fingers moving quickly, and the scouts nodded. They slipped back, silent as shadows, and Sylvanas turned her eyes toward Arthas. He did not seem to have noticed anything. He looked human, still, though pale, and his hair was white instead of golden, as she recalled it had been described to her. How then, could he stand this? Being surrounded by the dead-the horrible stench, the grotesque images... She shuddered and instructed herself to focus. The undead who obeyed him simply stood, awaiting orders. The humans-necromancers, Sylvanas thought, a wave of loathing rushing through her-were too busy creating new monstrosities to post lookouts. They could not conceive of defeat. Their arrogance would be their undoing. She waited, watching, until her archers were in position. Forewarned by Kelmarin, she had summoned fully two thirds of her rangers. She believed firmly that Arthas could not breech the magical elfgates that protected Quel'Thalas. There was too much he could not possibly know about them to
do so. Still...she had also not believed things that her eyes now told her was truth. Better to wipe out the threat here and now. She glanced at Sheldaris and Vor'athil. They caught her gaze and nodded. They were ready. Sylvanas yearned to simply strike, to take the enemy unawares, but honor forbade it. There would be no tales sung of how RangerGeneral Sylvanas Windrunner defended her homeland by underhanded means. "For Quel'Thalas," she whispered underneath her breath, and then stood. "You are not welcome here!" she cried, her voice clear and musical and strong. Arthas turned his skeletal steed-Sylvanas spared a moment to pity the poor beast-and faced her, peering at her intently. The necromancers fell silent, turning to their lord, awaiting instructions. "I am Sylvanas Windrunner, Ranger-General of Silvermoon. I advise you to turn back now." Arthas's lips-gray, she noticed, gray in a white face, although she knew somehow he yet lived-curled back in a smile. He was amused. "It is you who should turn back, Sylvanas," he said, deliberately omitting her title. His voice would have been a pleasant baritone had it not been underscored by...something. Something that made even her fierce heart stop for a moment as she heard it. She forced herself not to shiver. "Death itself has come to your land." Her blue eyes narrowed. "Do your worst," she challenged. "The elfgate to the inner kingdom is protected by our most powerful enchantments. You shall not pass." She nocked her bow-the signal for the attack. An instant later, the air was filled with the sudden hum of dozens of arrows in flight. Sylvanas had taken aim for the human-or once-human-prince, and her aim was as true as ever. The arrow sang as it sped toward Arthas's unprotected head. But an instant before it struck, she saw a flash of blue-white. Sylvanas stared. More swiftly than she could fathom, Arthas had brought up his sword, the runes in it emitting that cold blue-white glow, and sliced the arrow in two. He grinned at her and winked. "To battle, my troops-slay them all, that they may serve me and my lord!" Arthas cried. His voice echoed with that strange thrum of power. She growled deep in her throat and took aim again. But he was in motion now, the dead horse bearing him with unnatural swiftness, and she realized that his horrific troops were on the offensive now.
She thought of a swarm of insects as they converged, perfect in their mindless unity, upon her rangers. The archers had their instructions-cut down the living first, and then dispatch the dead with arrows set aflame. The first volley of arrows dropped nearly every single one of the cultists. The second saw dozens of blazing arrows embedded in the walking corpses. But even as they stumbled about, some of them almost tinder-dry, others moist and rotting, the sheer number of them began to turn the tide. They somehow managed to scramble up the nearly-vertical walls of earth and stone where her rangers were positioned. Some of them, mercifully, were too decayed to get far, their rotting limbs ripping from their bodies and causing them to fall. But the fall did not halt them. They pressed onward, upward, toward her rangers who now had to wield swords instead of arrows. They were trained warriors, of course, and could fight in close quarters. Fight against foes who could be slowed by the loss of blood, or limbs. But against these- Dead hands, more like claws than fingers, reached out to Sheldaris. Grim faced, the red-haired ranger fought fiercely, her lips moving in cries of defiance that Sylvanas could not hear. But they were closing in on her, ringing her, and Sylvanas felt a deep pain as she watched Sheldaris fall beneath them. She drew and fired, drew and fired, almost quicker than thought, focusing on her duty. Out of the corner of her eye she saw one of the grotesque winged creatures, its skin gray and appearing as hard as stone, swoop down within ten feet of her. Its batlike face snarled in glee as it reached down and, as easily as she might pluck ripe fruit from the tree, snatched Vor'athil and bore him aloft. Its fingers dug deeply into the scout's shoulders, and blood spattered on Sylvanas as the thing swooped upward with its prize. Vor'athil struggled in the creature's grasp, his fingers finding and freeing a dagger. Sylvanas turned her aim from the groaning undead below her to the monstrosity above. She fired, right at the creature's neck. The arrow glanced off harmlessly. The creature tossed its head and snarled, tiring of toying with Vor'athil. It lifted one hand and raked its claws across the scout's throat, then dropped him carelessly and circled back for more. Grieving silently, Sylvanas watched her friend fall lifeless to the earth, his body striking the pile of dead cultists her rangers had slain moments earlier.
And then she gasped. The cultists were moving. Arrows protruding from their bodies, sometimes over a dozen brightly fletched missiles in a single corpse, and yet they stirred. "No," she whispered, sickened. Her horrified gaze went to Arthas. The prince was looking straight at her, grinning that damnable grin. One powerful, gauntleted hand grasped the runeblade. The other was lifted in a beckoning gesture, and as she watched, yet another slain human stirred and shambled to its feet, pulling out the arrow from its eye as if it were plucking a burr from its clothing. Her attack had cost Arthas nothing. Any who fell would be raised by his dark magic. He saw the realization and the anger in her eyes, and the grin turned into a laugh. "I did try to tell you," he cried, his voice rising above the din of battle. "And still you provide me with new recruits...." He gestured again, and another body twitched as it was hauled upward and forced to stand on its feet. A body that had been slender but muscular, with long black hair swept back in a ponytail, with tanned skin and pointed ears. Blood still ran in red rivulets from the four scores in its throat, and the head bobbed erratically, as if the neck had been too badly damaged to support it much longer. Dead eyes that had once been blue as summer skies sought out Sylvanas. And then, slowly at first, it began to move toward her. Vor'athil. At that moment she felt the gate beneath her shudder, ever so slightly. So distracted had she been by the slaughter and reanimation of things that ought to stay dead that she had not noticed his siege engines maneuvering into position. The ogre-sized things that appeared to be comprised of various different corpses were battering away at the gate as well. So were the enormous, spiderlike creatures. Then something hit the wall with a soft, plopping sound. Wetness spattered Sylvanas. For a fraction of a second, her mind refused to accept what she had just witnessed, and then clarity broke upon her. Arthas was not only raising the corpses of the fallen elves. He was hurling their bodies-or pieces of them-back at Sylvanas as ammunition. Sylvanas swallowed hard, then issued the order that a few moments ago she never would have dreamed she would utter. "Shindu fallah na! Fall back to the second gate! Fall back!" Those who were left-ai, piteous few there were still, at least still alive
and fighting under her command-obeyed at once, gathering up the wounded and slinging them over their shoulders, their faces pale and sweat-streaked and reflecting the same forcibly contained terror that raced through her. They fled. There was no other word for it. This was no orderly, synchronized, martial retreat, but an all-out flight. Sylvanas ran with the rest of them, bearing the wounded as best she could, and her mind was racing. Behind her she heard the once-inconceivable sound of the gate cracking and the roar of the undead as they howled their triumph. Her own heart seemed to crack in agony. He had done it-but how? How? His voice, strong, resonant, with that undercurrent of something dark and terrible, rose over the noise. "The elfgate has fallen! Onward, my warriors! Onward to victory!" Somehow, to Sylvanas, the worst, most awful thing about that gleeful, gloating cry was the...affection...that laced through it. She seized the sleeve of a young man racing beside her. "Tel'kor," Sylvanas cried. "Make for the Sunwell Plateau. Tell them what we have seen here. Tell them-to be prepared." Tel'kor was young enough to let disappointment flicker over his handsome features at the thought of not standing to fight, but he nodded his golden head in comprehension. Sylvanas hesitated. "My lady?" "Tell them-we may have been betrayed." Tel'kor blanched at that, but nodded. Like an arrow shot from a bow, he raced away. He was a good archer, but Sylvanas did not suffer any illusion that one more bow would make a difference in the battle that was to come. But if the magi who controlled and directed the Sunwell's energies knew what they faced-that might. They were racing northward now, and as her troops crossed a bridge she suddenly stopped in mid-run, whirled on her heel, and looked back. Sylvanas gasped. That Arthas and his dark army were coming, she expected to see. That would have been a horrific enough sight; the undead, the abominations, the flying batlike things, the grotesque spidery beings- hundreds, bearing down with implacable determination. What she did not expect to see was what they left in their wake. Like a trail left by a slug, like a furrow left by a plow, the land where the undead feet had trod was blackened and barren. Worse; Sylvanas
remembered the burned woods the orcs had left behind, knew that nature would eventually reclaim it. This-it was a horrible dark line of death, as if the unnatural energies that were used to propel the corpses forward were killing the very earth upon which they shambled. Poison, they were poison, it was dark magic of the foulest kind. And it had to be stopped. She had paused only an instant, although to her it felt as though she had been frozen in place for a lifetime. "Hold!" she cried, her voice clear and strong and purposeful. "We will make our stand here." They were puzzled only briefly, then they understood. Quickly she spoke instructions, and they leaped to obey. Many of them paused, shocked, as they caught their first stunned glimpse of the grievous wound to the land that had so horrified their ranger-general, but they recovered quickly. Time enough to worry about healing the brutalized earth later. For now, they had to stop that dreadful scar from spreading. The stench preceded the army, but Sylvanas and her rangers now had a grim familiarity with it. It did not unnerve them as it had before. She stood on the bridge, her head held high, her black hood slipping a little to show bright golden hair. The army of the dead slowed and halted, confused by the sight. The ugly wagons, catapults, and trebuchets rumbled to a halt. Arthas's skeletal horse reared, and he reached down and stroked the bony neck as if it were a living beast. Sylvanas felt a shiver of nausea at the wrongness of the tableau as the thing responded to its master's touch. "Goodness," Arthas said, humor lacing the word with something akin to warmth. "This can't be one of the oh-so-imposing elfgates I've heard so much about." Sylvanas forced herself to grin back. "No, not quite. But you'll still find it a challenge." "It is but a simple bridge, my lady. But then again, the elves are very fond of putting paper manes on cats and calling them lions." She eyed his army for a moment, her anger penetrating her forced smugness. "You've won through this gate, butcher, but you won't get through the second. The inner gate to Silvermoon can only be opened with a special key, and it shall never be yours!" She nodded to her companions, and they raced across the bridge to join their fellows on the other side. Arthas's humor faded and his pale eyes flashed. His gauntleted hand
tightened on the runeblade. Its markings thrummed. "You waste your time, woman. You cannot outrun the inevitable. Though I admit it is amusing to watch you scurry." Now Sylvanas did laugh, an angry, satisfied sound that rolled up from some place deep in her soul. "You think I'm running from you? Apparently you've never fought elves before." Some things, she mused, were deliciously simple. Sylvanas lifted her hand, threw the extremely non-magical, quite practical incendiary device, then turned to run as the bridge exploded. The trees welcomed them, arching above them in hues of gold and silver, hiding them from their enemy. Before she faded from earshot, she heard something that made her grin fiercely. "The ranger woman is starting to vex me greatly." Yes. Vex you. Harry you like a sparrow does the hawk. The Elrendar bisects Eversong Woods, and you will find no crossing for your monstrous engines of war any time soon. She knew it was a delay, nothing more. But if the army was delayed long enough, perhaps she could get a message through. Worry fluttered at her mind. Arthas had seemed supremely confident that he would be able to defeat the magic that powered the elfgates. He had already shown some knowledge in that he had been able to destroy the first gate. Of course, the first gate was not as magically defended as the second. And, from what she had seen, arrogance seemed to be his normal state, but- was it possible? The nagging uncertainty that had prompted her to add a final warning to Tel'kor's message to the magi stirred within her again. Did Arthas know about the key?
CHAPTER NINETEEN
The traitor, a wizard by the name of Dar'Khan Drathir, should have made it easy. And to some extent he had, of course. Arthas would otherwise never have known about the Key of the Three Moons-a magical item that had been split into three separate mooncrystals stashed in heavily-guarded, hidden locations throughout Quel'Thalas. Each temple was constructed on an intersection of ley lines, similar to the Sunwell itself, the traitorous elf had told him, gleeful to be betraying his people so. The ley lines were like blood vessels of the earth, carrying magic instead of scarlet fluid. Thus interconnected, the crystals created a field of energy known as Ban'dinoriel -the Gatekeeper. All he needed to do was find these sites at An'telas, An'daroth, and An'owyn, slay the guards, and find the mooncrystals. But the excessively pretty, surprisingly tough elves presented a challenge. Arthas sat astride Invincible, idly fingering Frostmourne, and reflected on how it was that so fragile-seeming a race could stand up to his army. For army now it truly was-many hundreds of soldiers, all already dead and so more difficult to permanently dispatch. The ranger-general's clever little trick of blowing up the bridge had indeed cost Arthas precious time. The river ran through Quel'Thalas until it bumped up against several foothills to the east-foothills that posed the same challenge to the mobility of his engines of war that the water did. It had taken a while, but eventually they had crossed the river. As he pondered the solution, something had twinged at the back of his mind, a tingling sensation he couldn't quite figure out. Annoyed, he dismissed the strange sensation and instructed several of his unfailingly loyal soldiers to create their own bridge-a bridge made of rotting flesh. Dozens of them waded into the river and simply lay there, forming layer upon layer of corpses, until there were enough of them that the meat wagons, catapults, and trebuchets could make their lurching way across. Some of the undead, of course, were no longer of use, their bodies too broken or torn to hold cohesion. These Arthas almost gently released from his control, granting
them true death. Besides, their bodies would foul the purity of the river. It was an additional weapon. He, of course, could and did cross easily. Invincible plunged without hesitation into the water, and Arthas was abruptly reminded of the horse's fatal jump in the middle of winter, slipping on the icy rocks as he leaped, utterly obedient to the will of his master then as now. The memory crashed on him unexpectedly, and for a moment he couldn't breathe as pain and guilt washed over him. It was gone as quickly as it had come. Everything was better now. He was no longer an emotionally shattered child, racked by guilt and shame, sobbing in the snow as he lifted his sword to pierce the heart of a loyal friend. No, nor was Invincible a mere living creature, to be harmed by such a thing. They were both more powerful now. Stronger. Invincible would exist forever, serving his master, as he had always done. He would not know thirst, or pain, or hunger, or exhaustion. And he, Arthas, would take what he wished when he wished it. There was no more silent disapproval from his father, no more scolding from the too-pious Uther. No more dubious glances from Jaina, her brow furrowed in that dearly familiar expression of- Jaina... Arthas shook his head sharply. Jaina had had her chance to join with him. She had refused. Denied him, although she had sworn she would never do so. He owed her nothing. Only the Lich King commanded him now. The mental shift calmed him, and Arthas smiled and patted the jutting vertebrae of the undead beast, who tossed his bony head in response. Surely, it was the beautiful and willful ranger-general who had unsettled him and made him question, even momentarily, the wisdom of his path. She, too, had had her chance. Arthas had come for a purpose, and that purpose had not been to obliterate Quel'Thalas and its populace. Had they not resisted him, he would have let them be. Her sharp tongue and defiant behavior had brought her people's doom upon them, not he. The water seeped in through the joins of his armor and the breeches, shirt, and gambeson he wore beneath the metal plate grew wet and cold. Arthas did not feel it. A moment later Invincible surged forward, clambering out onto the opposite bank. The last of the meat wagons rumbled onto the bank as well, and what corpses were sufficiently intact slogged onto land. The rest lay where they had fallen, the once-crystal clear water flowing over and around them.
"Onward," the death knight said.
 
The rangers had retreated to Fairbreeze Village. Once the shock had passed, the citizens did everything they could, from tending the wounded to offering what weapons and skills they had. Sylvanas ordered those who could not fight to head to Silvermoon as quickly as possible. "Take nothing," she said as a woman nodded and hurried to ascend the ramp to an upper area. "But our rooms upstairs have-" Sylvanas whirled, her eyes flaring. "Do you not yet understand? The dead are marching upon us! They do not tire, they do not slow, and they take our fallen and add them to their ranks! We have delayed them, little more. Take your family and go!" The woman seemed taken aback by the ranger-general's response, but obeyed, wasting only a few moments rounding up her family before hastening down the road to the capital. Arthas would not be stopped for long. Sylvanas cast a sweeping, appraising glance over the wounded. None of them could stay here. They, too, would need to be evacuated to Silvermoon. As for those who were still hale, few though they were, she would need to ask yet more from them. Perhaps everything they had. They, like she, had sworn to defend their people. Now was the day of reckoning. There was a spire close by, between the Elrendar and Silvermoon. Somehow, she felt certain Arthas would find a way to cross and continue his march. Continue to wound the land with the purplish-black scar. The spire would be a good place to mount a defense. The ramps were narrow, preventing the crush of undead that had been so disastrous previously, and there were several stories to the building, all open to the air. She and her archers could do a great deal of damage before they were- Sylvanas Windrunner, Ranger-General of Silvermoon, took a calming breath, dashed water on her heated face, drank a deep draft of the soothing liquid, and rose to prepare the uninjured and walking wounded for what would no doubt be their final battle.
 
They were almost too late.
Even as the rangers marched on the spire that would be their bastion, the air, once so sweet and fresh, was tainted with the sickly odor of putrefaction. Overhead, mounted archers hovered on their dragonhawks. The great creatures, golden and scarlet, stretched their serpentine heads against the reins unhappily. They, too, scented death, and it disturbed them. Never had the beautiful beasts been pressed into such a ghastly service. One of the riders signaled Sylvanas, and she signaled back. "The undead have been sighted," she told her troops calmly. They nodded. "Positions. Hurry." Like a well-oiled gnomish machine, they obeyed. The dragonhawk riders surged south, toward the approaching enemy. A unit of archers and hand-tohand fighters hurried forward as well, the first line of defense. Her finest archers raced up the curving ramps of the spire. The rest spread out at the base of the structure. They did not have long to wait. If she had harbored any faint hope that somehow the numbers of the enemy might have suffered from the delay, it was dashed like fine crystal falling to a stone floor. She could glimpse the hideous vanguard now: rotting undead, followed by skeletons and the huge abominations whose three arms each carried massive weapons. Above them flew the stonelike creatures wheeling like buzzards. They are breaking through.... How strange the mind was, Sylvanas thought with a trace of macabre humor. Now, as the hour of her death doubtless approached, an ancient song played in her head; one she and her siblings had loved to sing, when the world was right and they were all together, Alleria, Vereesa, and their youngest brother, Lirath, at twilight when soft lavender shadows spread their gentle cloaks and the sweet scent of the ocean and flowers wafted across the land. Anar'alah, anar'alah belore, quel'dorei, shindu fallah na.... By the light, by the light of the sun, high elves, our enemies are breaking through.... Without her realizing it at first, her hand fluttered upward to close on the necklace she wore about her slender throat. It had been a gift, from her oldest sister, Alleria; delivered not by Alleria herself, but in her stead by one of her lieutenants, Verana. Alleria was gone, vanished through the Dark Portal in an attempt to stop the Horde from visiting their atrocities again on Azeroth and on other worlds as well.
She had never returned. She had melted down a necklace given to her by their parents, and made individual necklaces out of the three stones for each of the Windrunner sisters. Sylvanas's was a sapphire. She knew the inscription by heart: To Sylvanas. Love always, Alleria. She waited, grasping the necklace, feeling the connection with her dead sister it always provided, then slowly forced her hand away. Sylvanas took a deep breath and shouted, "Attack! For Quel'Thalas!" There would be no stopping them. In truth, she did not expect to stop them. From the expressions on the grim, bloodied faces around her, Sylvanas realized her rangers knew this as well as she. Sweat dewed her face. Her muscles screamed with exhaustion, and still Sylvanas Windrunner fought. She fired, nocking and releasing and nocking again so swiftly that her hands were almost a blur. When the swarm of corpses and monsters came too close for arrows, she flung her bow away and seized her short sword and dagger. She whirled and turned and stabbed, crying out incoherently as she battled. Another one fell, its head toppling from its shoulders to be trampled, bursting open like a melon beneath the feet of one of its own. Two more monstrocities surged forward to take its place. Still Sylvanas fought like one of the savage lynxes of Eversong Woods, channeling her pain and outrage into violence. She would take as many with her as she could before she fell. They are breaking through.... They pressed in, close, the reek of decay almost overwhelming her. Too many of them now. Sylvanas did not slow. She would fight until they had utterly destroyed her, until- The press of corpses suddenly was gone. They stepped back and stood still. Gasping for breath, Sylvanas looked down the hill. He was there, waiting on his undead steed. The wind played with his long white hair as he regarded her intently. She straightened, wiping blood and sweat from her face. A paladin, he had been once. Her sister had loved one such as him. Suddenly Sylvanas was fiercely glad that Alleria was dead, could not see this, could not see what a former champion of the Light was doing to everything the Windrunners loved and cherished. Arthas lifted the glowing runeblade in a formal gesture. "I salute your bravery, elf, but the chase is over." Oddly, he sounded like he meant the compliment. Sylvanas swallowed; her mouth was dry as bone. She tightened her grip on her weapons. "Then I'll make my stand here, butcher. Anar'alah belore."
His gray lips twitched. "As you will, Ranger-General." He did not even bother to dismount. Instead the skeletal steed whinnied and galloped straight toward her. Arthas gripped the reins with his left hand, his right drawing back the massive sword. Sylvanas sobbed, once. No cry of fear or regret came from those lips. Only a short, harsh sob of impotent anger, of hatred, of righteous fury that she was not able to stop them, not even when she had given all she could, not even with her life's blood. Alleria, sister, I come. She met the deadly blade head-on, striking it with her own weapons, which shattered upon impact. And then the runeblade had pierced her. Cold, so cold it was, slicing through her as if it was made of ice itself. Arthas leaned in to her, his gaze locked with hers. Sylvanas coughed, fine droplets of blood spattering his bone-pale face. Was it her imagination, or was there a hint of regret on his still-fine features? He tugged back his weapon and she fell, blood gushing out of her. Sylvanas shivered on the cold stone floor, the movement causing agony to rip through her. One hand fluttered, foolishly, to the gaping wound in her abdomen, as if her hands could close on it and stop the flood. "Finish it," she whispered. "I deserve...a clean death." His voice floated to her from somewhere as her eyes closed. "After all you've put me through, woman, the last thing I'll give you is the peace of death." Fear spiked in her for a heartbeat, then faded as everything else was beginning to. He would raise her, as one of those grotesque shambling things? "No," she murmured, her voice sounding as if it came from a long way off. "You wouldn't...dare...." And then it went away. It all went away. The coldness, the stench, the searing pain. It was soft and warm and dark and calm and comforting, and Sylvanas permitted herself to sink into the welcoming darkness. At last she could rest, could lay down the arms she had borne for so long in service to her people. And then- Agony shot through her, agony such as she had never known, and Sylvanas suddenly knew that no physical pain she had ever endured could hold a pale candle to this torment. This was an agony of the spirit, of her soul leaving her lifeless form and being trapped. Of a...ripping, tearing, yanking
back from that warm sanctuary of silence and stillness. The violence of the act added to the exquisite torment, and Sylvanas felt a scream welling up, forcing its way from deep inside, past lips that somehow she knew were no longer physical, a deep keening wail of a suffering that was not hers alone, that froze blood and stopped hearts. The blackness faded from her vision, but colors did not return. She did not need reds or blues or yellows to see him, though, her tormentor; he was white and gray and black even in a world with color. The runeblade that had taken her life, had taken and consumed her soul, glittered and gleamed, and Arthas's free hand was lifted in a beckoning gesture as he ripped her from the soothing embrace of death. "Banshee," he told her. "Thus I have made you. You can give voice to your pain, Sylvanas. I will give you that much. It is more than the others get. And in so doing, you shall cause pain to others. So now you, troublesome ranger, shall serve." Terrified beyond reason, Sylvanas hovered over her bloodied, broken corpse, gazing into her own staring eyes, then back at Arthas. "No," she said, her voice hollow and eerie, yet still recognizably hers. "I will never serve you, butcher." He gestured. It was the merest thing, a twitch of a gauntleted finger. Her back arched in agony and another scream was torn from her, and she realized with a racking, raging sense of grief that she was utterly powerless before him. She was his tool, as the rotting corpses and the pale, reeking abominations were his tools. "Your rangers serve as well," he said. "They are now in my army." He hesitated, and there was genuine regret in his voice when he said, "It did not have to be this way. Know that your fate, theirs, and that of your people, rests upon your choices. But I must press on to the Sunwell. And you will assist me."
 
The hate grew inside Sylvanas like a living thing in her incorporeal body. She floated beside him, his shiny new toy, her body gathered up and flung on one of the meat wagons to who knew what sick end Arthas could devise. As if there was a thread that bound her to him, she never was more than a few feet away from the death knight. And she was beginning to hear the whispers.
At first, Sylvanas wondered if she was insane in this new, abhorrent incarnation. But it soon became apparent that even the refuge of the mad was denied her. The voice in her mind was unintelligible at first, and in her wretched state she did not wish to hear. But soon she understood to whom it belonged. Arthas kept giving her sidelong glances as he continued his inexorable march to Silvermoon and beyond, watching her closely. At one point, as this army of which she was a captive part surged forward, destroying the land as it passed, she heard it very clearly. For my glory, you will serve, Sylvanas. For the dead, you will toil. For obedience, you will hunger. Arthas is the first and most beloved of my death knights; he will command you forever, and you will find it joyous. Arthas saw her shiver, and he smiled. If she had thought she despised him when she first beheld him outside the gates of Quel'Thalas, when the wondrous land within was still clean and pure and had not known the killing touch; if she had thought she hated him as his minions slew her people and raised them to become lifeless puppets, and when he impaled her in a single, savage blow with the monstrous runeblade -it was as nothing to what she felt now. A candle to a sun, a whisper to a banshee's scream. Never, she told the voice in her head. He directs my actions, but Arthas cannot break my will. The only answer was hollow, cold laughter. On they pushed, past Fairbreeze Village and the East Sanctum. At the gates of Silvermoon itself they halted. Arthas's voice should not have carried as it did, but Sylvanas knew that it was heard in every corner of the city as he stood in front of the gates. "Citizens of Silvermoon! I have given you ample opportunities to surrender, but you have stubbornly refused. Know that today, your entire race and your ancient heritage will end! Death itself has come to claim the high home of the elves!" She, Ranger-General Sylvanas Windrunner, was paraded in front of her people as an example of what would happen to them if they did not surrender. They did not, and she loved them fiercely for it even as she was pressed into service by her dark master. And so it fell, the shining, beautiful city of magic, its glories shattered and reduced to rubble as the army of undead-the Scourge, she heard Arthas
call them, twisted affection in his voice-pressed on. As he had before, Arthas raised the fallen to serve, and if Sylvanas had still possessed a heart, it would have broken at the sight of so many friends and loved ones shambling beside her, mindlessly obedient. On through the city they marched, cleaving it in twain with the vile purple-black scar, its citizens lurching to their feet with wounds that had smashed skulls, or trailing viscera behind them as they shambled forward. She had hoped the channel between Silvermoon and Quel'Danas would prove an impassable barrier, and for a moment that hope seemed realized. Arthas drew rein, staring at the blue water glinting in the sun, and frowned. For a moment he sat atop his unnatural steed, his white brows knitted together. "You cannot fill this channel with corpses, Arthas," Sylvanas had gloated. "Not even the whole city would be enough. You are stopped here, and your failure is sweet." And then the being who had once been human, who had once by all accounts been a good man, turned and grinned at her blistering words of defiance, sending her into a paroxysm of agony and wrenching another soul-splitting scream from her incorporeal lips. He had found a solution. He cast Frostmourne toward the shore, watching it almost rapturously as it flipped end over end to land with its tip impaled in the sand. "Frostmourne speaks...." Sylvanas heard it, too, the voice of the Lich King emanating from the unholy weapon as before her shocked gaze the water lapping at its runeinscribed blade began to turn to ice. Ice that his weapons, and his warriors, could cross. He took her life, he took her beloved Quel'Thalas and Silvermoon, then he took her king before the final violation. They had resisted, on Quel'Danas, resisted with all they had in them. When Anasterian appeared before Arthas, his fiery magics wreaked havoc on the death knight's icy bridge, but Arthas recovered. He frowned, his eyes flashing, drew Frostmourne, and bore down upon the elven king. Even as she hoped desperately that Anasterian would defeat Arthas, Sylvanas knew he would not. Three millennia rested upon those shoulders; the white hue of hair that fell almost to his feet was due to age, not dark magics. He had been a powerful fighter once, and was still a powerful mage, but to her new, spectral sight, there was a frailty about him she had not seen when she breathed. Still, he stood, his ancient weapon, Felo'melorn,
"Flamestrike," in one hand, a staff with a powerful, glittering crystal in the other. Arthas struck, but Anasterian was no longer standing in front of the charging steed. Somehow, faster than Sylvanas could see, he was kneeling, swinging Felo'melorn in a clean horizontal strike across the horse's forelegs, severing both of them. The horse shrieked and fell, its rider with it. "Invincible!" Arthas cried, seeming stricken as the undead horse rolled and tried to get to its feet while missing its two forelegs. It seemed an odd battle cry to Sylvanas, considering Anasterian had just gained an advantage. But the face Arthas turned toward the elven king was full of naked rage and pain. He looked almost human now; a human male seeing something he loved in torment. He scrambled to his feet, glancing back distractedly at the horse, and for a wild moment Sylvanas thought maybe, just maybe- The ancient elven weapon was no match for the runeblade, as Sylvanas knew it would not, could not be. It snapped as the blades clashed, the severed piece whirling away crazily as Anasterian fell, his soul ripped from him and consumed by the glowing Frostmourne, as had been so many others. He sprawled on the ice, limp, blood pooling beneath him, white hair spread out like a shroud, while Arthas rushed to the undead horse and mended its severed legs, patting the bones while it pranced and nuzzled at him. And Sylvanas, although she knew it would harm those she still loved, could not carry the weight of the pain and anguish and sheer burning hatred of Arthas and all he had done. Her head fell back, her arms spreading as her mouth opened, and a cry, beautiful and terrible at once, was torn from an insubstantial throat. She had cried out before, as he had tortured her. But that was only her own pain, her own despair. This was so much more. Torment, agony, yes, but more than that, a hatred so profound as to be almost pure. She heard other cries of pain mingling with hers, saw elves dropping to their knees clutching ears that began to bleed. Their voices and their spells were stopped, changed from words of magic to incoherent cries of raw grief and startled pain. Some of them fell, their armor shattering and breaking off of them in jagged shards; their very bones breaking beneath their flesh. Even Arthas stared at her for a moment, his white brows drawn together in an appraising gesture. She wanted to stop. She wanted to silence herself, muffle this cry of destruction that only served he whom she hated so passionately. At last it wore down beneath her pain, and Sylvanas, banshee,
fell sickly silent. "What a fine weapon you are indeed," Arthas murmured. "And mayhap you will be a double-edged sword. I will be watching you." The horrible army pressed on. Arthas reached the plateau. He reached it, and slew those who guarded the Sunwell, and forced her to participate in the slaughter. And then he visited the ultimate horror upon her people, marching up to the glorious pool of radiance that had sustained the quel'dorei for millennia. Beside it, waiting for him, stood a figure Sylvanas recognized- Dar'Khan Drathir. So it had been he who had betrayed Quel'Thalas. He who, even more than Arthas, had the blood of thousands upon his well-manicured hands. Fury raged through her. She watched the glow she knew to be golden play upon Arthas's features, softening them and lending them an artificial warmth. Then he upended the contents of an exquisitely crafted urn into the waters, and the radiance changed. It began to pulse and swirl, and inside the swirling center of the damaged magical glow- -a shadow- Even after all she had witnessed this dark day, even after what she had become, Sylvanas was stunned at what emerged from the befouled Sunwell, rising and lifting its arms to the skies. A skeleton, horned and grinning, its eye sockets burning with fire. Chains snaked around it and purple vestments fluttered with its movements. "I am reborn, as promised! The Lich King has granted me eternal life!" It had all been for this? To raise this single entity? All the slaughter, the torment, the terror; the unspeakably precious and vital Sunwell corrupted, a way of life that had lasted for thousands of years shattered-for this? She stared sickly at the cackling lich, and the only thing that gave her even a hint of surcease from the agony was watching Dar'Khan, who had attempted to betray his master as he had betrayed his people, dying, as she had done, from Frostmourne's keen edge.
CHAPTER TWENTY
The cold wind tousled Arthas's white hair, caressed his face, and he smiled. It was good, to be again in the colder part of this world. The elven land, with its eternal early summer, heavy with the scents of blossoms and growth, had made him uneasy. It reminded him too much of the gardens of Dalaran, where he had spent so much time with Jaina; of the snapdragons of the Balnir farm. Better the wind, to scour him clean, and the coldness, to quell those memories. They no longer served him, but weakened him, and there was no room for weakness in the heart of Arthas Menethil. He was, as ever, atop his loyal horse, Invincible. He had had a bad moment in Quel'Thalas, when that bastard king Anasterian had cowardly attacked an innocent steed rather than its rider, severing its legs in the same way that in life had caused Invincible's death. The incident had catapulted Arthas back in time to those horrible moments, shaking him to the core and in the case of the battle with Anasterian, unleashing an icy rage that in the end had served him well. Before and behind him, his army marched through the snowy pass, untiring, unaffected by the cold. Somewhere in among their ghastly number floated a banshee. Arthas would let Sylvanas be, for the moment. He was more interested in Kel'Thuzad, who glided beside him almost serenely, if such a word could ever be applied to a lich. He was the one who had directed the Scourge to this remote, frozen place, and Arthas had until now not questioned. But the trek was getting boring, and he was curious. The prince felt a smile curve his lips. "So," he quipped, "you're not upset about me killing you that one time?" "Don't be foolish," the undead necromancer replied. "The Lich King told me how our encounter would end." That surprised Arthas. "The Lich King knew that I would kill you?" He frowned, glancing down at the blade that stretched across his lap. It was silent now, dormant. No whispers came from it, nor did the runes pulse with power. "Of course," Kel'Thuzad responded, a hint of superiority in his sepulchral voice. "He chose you to be his champion long before the Scourge
even began." Arthas's unease deepened. No one had asked him, or even told him about his destiny. But would he have embraced it, had he known? No, he decided. He did not like being manipulated, but he knew that he had had to be tempered if he was to be a formidable weapon. He had to go step by step to his fate, otherwise he would have rejected it. He would then still be with Jaina and Uther and his father would- "If he's so all knowing, then how can the dreadlords control him like they do?" "They are agents of the one who created our master: the fiery lords of the Burning Legion." The words sent a shiver through Arthas. Burning Legion. Two words only, but the power they promised was heady, somehow. In his lap, Frostmourne flickered. "It is a vast demonic army that has consumed countless worlds beyond our own." Kel'Thuzad's voice was almost hypnotic, and Arthas shut his eyes for a moment. Behind the closed lids, scenes played out in his mind as the lich spoke. He saw a red sky arcing over a red world. Over a ridge poured a wave of creatures. They ran like hounds, but no natural beasts were they- they had fearsome jaws crammed with teeth, and strange tentacles sprouting from their shoulders. Stones crashed to the earth, leaving trails of green fire, to come to life as animated rock that marched on their foes. "Now, it comes to set this world to the flame. Our master was created to pave the way for its arrival. The dreadlords were sent to make sure he succeeded." The scene in Arthas's mind shifted. He was looking at an ornate carved gateway. He knew it to be the Dark Portal, although he had never seen it with his own eyes. It radiated green fire, and a host of demons were clustered around it. Arthas shook his head and the vision evaporated. "So the plague in Lordaeron, the citadels in Northrend, the slaughtering of the elves...it was all just to prepare for some huge demonic invasion?" "Yes. In time, you will find that our entire history has been shaped by the coming conflict." Arthas pondered this. Frostmourne was definitely awakening, and he removed the gauntlet from his right hand to caress it. Cold, bone cold it was, so cold that even his death knight's hand, which had been tempered for such a task, ached as he touched it. He felt the whispers again, and smiled.
"There is more, lich, is there not?" he asked, turning to regard Kel'Thuzad. "You have said that the dreadlords imprison our master. Tell me now." Not possessing flesh any longer, Kel'Thuzad had no facial expressions with which to betray his emotions. But Arthas knew by the slight hunching of the undead's form that he was uncomfortable. Nonetheless, he spoke. "The first phase of the Lich King's plan was to engineer the Scourge, which would eradicate any group that might resist the Legion's arrival." Arthas nodded. "Like the forces of Lordaeron...and the high elves." He felt a vague knot in the pit of his stomach, but dismissed it. "Exactly. The second phase is to actually summon the demon lord who will spark the invasion." The lich lifted a bony finger and pointed in the direction in which they traveled. "There is a nearby encampment of orcs who maintain a functional demon gate. I must use the gate to commune with the demon lord and receive his instructions." Arthas sat quietly atop Invincible for a moment. His mind went back to when he had fought orcs alongside Uther the Lightbringer at Strahnbrad. He recalled the orcs had performed human sacrifices to their demon lords. He and Uther had both been disgusted and appalled. Arthas himself had been so infuriated that Uther had had to lecture him on not fighting with rage in his heart. "If we allow our passions to turn to bloodlust, then we will become as vile as the orcs," Uther had chided. Well, Uther was dead, and while Arthas was still killing orcs, he was now working with demons. A muscle twitched near his eye. "What are we waiting for?" he snapped, and urged Invincible into a gallop.
 
The orcs fought bravely, but in the end, it was futile, as all attempts to halt the Scourge would be futile. Arthas galloped forward, Invincible leaping nimbly over fallen orc bodies. He regarded the gate for a long moment. Three stone slabs, strangely elegant for so brutal a race. Erected nearby, though, were huge animal bones that glowed a dull red hue. In the confines outlined by the slabs of stone, green energy swirled sluggishly. A passage to another world. Jaina would be intrigued-but too horrified to pursue her curiosity. That was what made her weak. It...was what made her Jaina....
"The brutes have been slain," Arthas spat. "The demon gate is yours, lich." The skeletal form shivered with delight, floating forward and lifting his arms imploringly. Steps led up to the archway; Arthas noticed that the lich did not ascend any of them. He stood at the bottom, out of respect-or out of a more pragmatic desire to avoid harm. Arthas hung back, watching intently from atop Invincible. "I call upon thee, Archimonde! Your humble servant seeks an audience!" The green mist continued to swirl. Then, Arthas realized he could make out a shape-features-that were both like and unlike the dreadlords he was more familiar with. The being had what Arthas guessed to be blue-gray skin, though with the green light tingeing him, it was difficult to be certain. There was no question, however, that the demon's body was powerful, with a mighty barrel chest, large, strong arms, and a lower body that seemed to be shaped like that of a goat-Archimonde's legs curved back, ending in a pair of cloven hooves instead of feet. A tail twitched, perhaps belying Archimonde's calm, incontrol demeanor. Arms, shoulders, and legs were encased in golden, gleaming armor adorned with shapes of skulls and spikes. Twin tentacles, long and thin, dangled from his chin. But the most arresting feature of his elongated face were his eyes, which glowed a sickly green color that was brighter and more compelling than the green mist that whirled about him. Even though Archimonde was not yet here, not yet physically in this world, Arthas was not unmoved by the demon's presence. "You called my name, puny lich, and I have come," said the demon, his voice resonant and seeming to vibrate along Arthas's very bones. "You are Kel'Thuzad, are you not?" Kel'Thuzad bowed his horned head. He was all but groveling, Arthas noted. "Yes, great one. I am the summoner. I beg of you, tell me how I may expedite your passage into this world. I exist only to serve." "There is a special tome you must find," the demon lord intoned. His gaze flickered to Arthas, examined him for a moment, then dismissed him. Arthas found himself growing annoyed. "The only remaining spellbook of Medivh, the Last Guardian. Only his lost incantations are powerful enough to bring me into your world. Seek out the mortal city of Dalaran. It is there that the tome is kept. At twilight, three days from now, you will begin the summoning."
The image disappeared. Arthas stared at where it had been for a long moment. Dalaran. The greatest concentration of magic, other than Quel'Thalas, in Azeroth. Dalaran. Where Jaina Proudmoore had trained. Where Jaina still would probably be. A flicker of pain blinked through him for an instant. "Dalaran is defended by the most powerful magi in Azeroth," he said slowly to Kel'Thuzad. "There is no way to hide our approach. They will be prepared for us." "As Quel'Thalas was?" Kel'Thuzad laughed, a hollow sound. "Think how easily this army crushed them. They will do the same there. Besides, remember-I was a member of the Kirin Tor, and close to Archmage Antonidas. Dalaran was my home, when I was nothing more than mortal flesh. I know its secrets, its protective spells, ways to slip inside they never thought to properly guard. It is sweet, to be able to visit terror upon those who would have seen me abandon my path and my destiny. Do not fear, death knight. We cannot fail. No one, no thing, can stop the Scourge." Out of the corner of his eye, Arthas caught movement. He turned and beheld the floating spirit that had once been Sylvanas Windrunner. She had obviously been listening to the entire conversation and seen his reaction to his new orders. "This talk of Dalaran moves you," she said archly. "Silence, ghost," he muttered, despite himself remembering the first time he had entered the gates of Dalaran as escort to Jaina. The innocence of that time was almost impossible for him to conceive of anymore. "Someone there you care for, perhaps? Pleasant memories?" The damned banshee would not let up. He surrendered to his anger, lifted a hand, and she writhed in pain for a moment before he released her. "You will say no more of this," he warned. "Let us be about our task." Sylvanas was silent. But on her pale, ghostly face was a savage smirk of satisfaction.
 
"I can help." Jaina's voice was calm, calmer than she actually expected it to sound. She stood with her master, Antonidas, in his familiar, loved, wonderfully disorganized study, gazing at him intently. "I've learned so much."
The archmage stood gazing out the window, his hands clasped loosely behind his back, as if he were doing nothing more serious than looking down at students at practice. "No," he said quietly. "You have other duties." He turned to regard her then, and her heart sank at the expression on his face. "Duties I...and Terenas, Light rest his soul...both shirked. Because of his refusal to listen to that strange prophet, he ended up murdered by his son, and his kingdom lies in ruins, inhabited only by the dead." Even now, Jaina cringed at the statement. Arthas... It was still so hard to believe. She had loved him so much...loved him still. Her constant prayer, silent and known only to her, was that he was under some sort of influence he could not resist. Because if he had done all this of his own will- "I, too, was asked, and I, too, had the arrogance to assume I knew best. And so, my dear, here we are. We all must live-or die-with our decisions." Antonidas smiled sadly. Her eyes stung with tears she blinked back and refused to shed. "Let me stay. I can-" "Keep safe those you have promised to take care of, Jaina Proudmoore," Antonidas said, a hint of sternness creeping into his voice and mien. "One more or one less here...will make no difference. Others look to you now." "Antonidas..." Her voice broke on the word. She rushed toward him, flinging her arms around him. She had never dared embrace him before; he had always intimidated her far too much. But now, he looked...old. Old, and frail, and worst of all, resigned. "Child," he said affectionately, patting her back, then chuckled. "No, you are a child no longer. You are a woman and a leader. Still...you had best go." From outside a voice rang out, strong and clear and familiar. Jaina felt as though she had been struck. She gasped in sickened recognition, pulling back from her mentor's embrace. "Wizards of the Kirin Tor! I am Arthas, first of the Lich King's death knights! I demand that you open your gates and surrender to the might of the Scourge!" Death knight? Jaina turned her shocked gaze to Antonidas, who gave her a sad smile. "I would have spared you the knowing...at least for now." She reeled with the knowledge. Arthas...here... The archmage strode to the balcony. A slight flutter of age-gnarled hands,
and his own voice was as magnified as Arthas's had been. "Greetings, Prince Arthas," Antonidas called down. "How fares your noble father?" "Lord Antonidas," Arthas replied. Where was he? Right outside? Would she see him if she stepped beside Antonidas on the balcony? "There's no need to be snide." Jaina turned her head away and wiped at her eyes. She struggled to speak, but the words seemed to stick in her throat. "We've prepared for your coming, Arthas," Antonidas continued calmly. "My brethren and I have erected auras that will destroy any undead that pass through them." "Your petty magics will not stop me, Antonidas. Perhaps you've heard what happened in Quel'Thalas? They thought themselves invulnerable as well." Quel'Thalas. Jaina thought she might be sick. She had been here in Dalaran when word had come, from a handful of survivors who had managed to escape, about what had happened to Quel'Thalas. So too had been the quel'dorei prince. She had never seen Kael'thas so-so angry, so shattered, so raw. She had gone to him, words of compassion and comfort on her lips, but he whirled and gazed at her with such a look of fury that she instinctively drew back. "Say nothing," Kael had snarled. His fists clenched; she could see, to her shock, that he was barely restraining himself from physically harming her. "Foolish girl. This is the monster you would take to your bed?" Jaina blinked, stunned at the crudeness of the words coming from one so cultured. "I-" But he was not interested in hearing anything she had to say. "Arthas is a butcher! He has slaughtered thousands of innocent people! There is so much blood on his hands that a whole ocean could never wash them clean. And you loved him? Chose him over me?" His voice, normally so mellifluous and controlled, cracked on the last word. Jaina felt quick tears come to her eyes as she suddenly understood. He was attacking her because he could not attack his real enemy. He felt helpless, impotent, and was striking out at the nearest target-at her, Jaina Proudmoore, whose love he had wanted and failed to win. "Oh...Kael'thas," she said softly, "he has done...terrible things," she began. "What your people have suffered-" "You know nothing of suffering!" he cried. "You are a child, with a
child's mind and a child's heart. A heart that you would give to that-that- he slaughtered them, Jaina. And then he raised their corpses!" Jaina stared at him mutely, his words having no sting now that she knew the reason for them. "He murdered my father, Jaina, just as he murdered his own. I-I should have been there." "To die with him? With the rest of your people? What good would throwing your life away do for-" No sooner had the words left her lips than she realized that it was the wrong thing to say. Kael'thas tensed and cut her off sharply. "I could have stopped him. I should have." He straightened, and coldness suddenly chased away the fire in him. He bowed low, exaggeratedly. "I will be departing Dalaran as soon as possible. There is nothing for me here." Jaina winced at the emptiness, the resignation in his voice. "I was a fool of the greatest order to ever think any of you humans could aid me. I will leave this place of doddering old magi and ambitious young ones. None of you can help. My people need me to lead now that my father-" He fell silent and swallowed hard. "I must go to them. To what pathetically few remain. To those who have endured, rebirthed by the blood of those who now serve your beloved." He had stalked off then, fury etched in every line of his tall, elegant body, and Jaina had felt her own heart ache with his pain. And now, he was here; Arthas was here, at the head of the army of the undead, a death knight himself. Antonidas's voice startled her out of her reverie and she blinked, trying to return to the present moment. "Pull your troops back, or we will be forced to unleash our full powers against you! Make your choice, death knight." Antonidas stepped back from the balcony and turned to regard Jaina. "Jaina," he said in his normal voice, "we will be erecting teleportation-blocking barriers momentarily. You must go before you are trapped here." "Maybe I can reason with him...maybe I can..." She fell silent, hearing the unrealistic wanting in her own voice. She hadn't even been able to stop him from murdering innocents in Stratholme, or going to Northrend when she was certain it was a trap. He'd not listened to her then. If Arthas was indeed under some dark influence, how could she dissuade him now? She took a deep breath and stepped back, and Antonidas nodded softly. There was so much she wanted to say to this man, her mentor, her guide. But all she could do was give him a shaky smile, now, as he fought what they
both knew would likely be his last battle. She found she couldn't even say good-bye to him. "I'll take care of our people," she said thickly, cast the teleportation spell, and disappeared.
 
The first part of the battle was over, and Arthas had gotten what he had come for. Arthas had obtained the requested spellbook of Medivh. It was large and curiously heavy for its size, bound in red leather with gold binding. Across its front was an exquisitely tooled black raven, its wings outspread. The book still had Antonidas's blood on it. He wondered if that would make it more potent. Invincible shifted beneath him, stamping a hoof and shaking his neck as if he still had flesh that could be irritated by flies. They were on a hilltop overlooking Dalaran, whose towers still caught the light and gleamed in hues of gold and white and purple while its streets ran with blood. Many of the magi who had fought him hours before stood beside him now. Most of them were too badly damaged to be of use other than as fodder to throw at attackers, but some...some could still be used, the skills they had in life harnessed to serve the Lich King in death. Kel'Thuzad was like a child on Winter Veil morning. He was perusing the pages of Medivh's spellbook, thoroughly engrossed with this new toy. It irritated Arthas. "The circle of power has been prepared per your instructions, lich. Are you ready to begin the summoning?" "Nearly," the undead thing replied. Skeletal fingers turned a page of the book. "There is much to absorb. Medivh's knowledge of demons alone is staggering. I suspect that he was far more powerful than anyone ever realized." A blackish-green swirl had begun manifesting as Kel'Thuzad spoke, and Tichondrius appeared as he finished. Arthas's irritation deepened as the dreadlord spoke with his usual arrogance. "Not powerful enough to escape death, that is for certain. Suffice to say, the work he began, we will finish... today. Let the summoning commence!" And that quickly, he was gone. Kel'Thuzad floated into the circle. The space was marked out by four small obelisks. In their center, a glowing circle with arcane markings had been etched. Kel'Thuzad bore the book with him,
and once he fluttered into position, the lines of the circle flared to glowing purple life. At the same moment, there was a spitting, crackling sound and eight pillars of flame sprang up about him. Kel'Thuzad turned to gaze back at Arthas with glowing eyes. "Those who yet live within Dalaran will be able to sense the power of this spell," Kel'Thuzad warned. "I must not be interrupted or we will fail." "I'll keep your bones safe, lich," Arthas assured him. As Kel'Thuzad had promised, it had been comparatively easy to enter Dalaran, slay those who had erected specific spells against them, and take what they had come for. Arthas had even been able to kill Archmage Antonidas, the man he had once thought so very powerful. If Jaina had been there, he felt certain that she would have confronted him. Appealed to what they had once had, as she had done before. She would have had no better luck now than she had then, except- He was glad he did not have to fight her. Arthas's attention suddenly snapped back to the present. The gates were opening, and Arthas's gray lips curved in a grin. Previously, the Scourge had had the element of surprise on their side. Yes, many powerful magi lived in Dalaran at all times. But there was no trained militia, nor were all the magi of the Kirin Tor in Dalaran. But they had had several hours, and they had not been idle. They had teleported in an army. Good. A solid fight was just what he needed to drive distracting thoughts of Jaina Proudmoore and the youth he had once been to the back of his mind. He lifted Frostmourne, feeling it tingle in his hand, hearing the soft voice of the Lich King caress his thoughts. "Frostmourne hungers," he told his troops, pointing the sword at the armor-clad defenders of the great mage city. "Let us sate its appetite." The Scourge army roared, Sylvanas's anguished wail rising above the cacophony, causing Arthas to grin even more. Even in death, even though she obeyed his commands, she defied him, and he relished forcing her to attack those she would have preferred to defend. Invincible gathered himself beneath his rider and surged forward at a full gallop, whinnying. Some of his ghastly troops stayed behind to defend Kel'Thuzad, but most of them accompanied their leader. Arthas recognized the livery of many of those whom the Kirin Tor had teleported in to defend the city. Friends they had once been, but that was all in the past, as irrelevant to him as yesterday's
weather. It was getting easier now, to feel nothing but satisfaction as Frostmourne, glowing and all but singing as it feasted upon souls, rose and fell, cutting through plate as easily as flesh. After the first wave of soldiers fell, raised to serve in the Scourge or abandoned where they had fallen as of no use, a second one came. This one had magi with them, clad in the purple robes of Dalaran with an embroidered symbol of the great Eye upon them. But Arthas, too, had additional aid. The demons, it would seem, wished to protect their own. Giant stones screamed down from the sky, their tails streaks of fel green fire. The earth shook where they struck, and from the craters caused by their impact climbed what looked like stone golems, held together and directed by the sickly green energy. Arthas glanced over his shoulder. Kel'Thuzad hovered, his arms spread, his horned head thrown back. Energy crackled and coursed from him, and a green orb began to form. Then, abruptly, the lich lowered his arms and stepped out of the circle. "Come forth, Lord Archimonde!" Kel'Thuzad cried. "Enter this world and let us bask in your power!" The green orb pulsed, expanding, growing taller and glowing yet more brightly. Suddenly a pillar of fire shot skyward, and several answering lightning bolts crackled down outside the circle. And then, where there had been nothing, a figure stood-tall, powerful, graceful in its own dark and dangerous way. Arthas returned his attention to the battlefield. A retreat sounded-clearly the magi, at least, had seen what was transpiring, and their troops wheeled their mounts and galloped back toward the safety-temporary though Arthas suspected it to be-of Dalaran. Even as they fled, a deep, resonant voice cut through the sound of battle. "Tremble, mortals, and despair! Doom has come to this world!" Arthas held up his hand, and with that simplest of gestures the swarm of Scourge halted and retreated as well. As he galloped back to Kel'Thuzad, eyeing the giant demon lord all the while, Tichondrius teleported in. As usual, after all the danger had passed. The dreadlord made a deep obeisance. Arthas drew rein some distance away, preferring to observe. "Lord Archimonde, all the preparations have been made." "Very well, Tichondrius," replied Archimonde, giving the lesser demon a dismissive nod. "Since the Lich King is of no further use to me, you
dreadlords will now command the Scourge." Arthas was suddenly very grateful for all those hours spent in disciplined meditation. It was only that that kept his shock and fury from showing. Even so, Invincible felt the change in him and pranced nervously. He yanked on the reins and the undead beast stilled. The Lich King was of no further use? Why? Who exactly was he, and what had happened to him? What would happen to Arthas? "Soon, I will order the invasion to begin. But first, I will make an example of these paltry wizards...by crushing their city into the ashes of history." He strode off, his body erect and proud and commanding, his hooves landing firmly with each step, his armor gleaming in the rose and gold and lavender of the encroaching twilight. Beside him, still making obeisance, strode Tichondrius. Arthas waited until they were some distance away before he finally whirled on Kel'Thuzad and burst out, "This has got to be a joke! What happens to us now?" "Be patient, young death knight. The Lich King foresaw this as well. You may yet have a part to play in his grand design." May? Arthas whirled on the necromancer, his nostrils flaring, but he tamped back his anger. If anyone-either of the demons or the Lich King himself-thought for one moment that Arthas was a tool to simply be used and then discarded, he would soon show them the error of their thinking. He had done too much-lost too much, cut out too much of himself for this to be cast aside. It couldn't all be for nothing. It would not all be for nothing. The earth rumbled. Invincible shifted uneasily, lifting his hooves as if to minimize contact with the earth. Arthas glanced up quickly at the mage city. The towers were lovely at this time of day, proud and glorious and glittering in the deepening twilight hues. But as he watched, he heard a deep cracking noise. The apex of the tallest, most beautiful tower in the city suddenly fell, slowly and inexorably, tumbling downward as if the length of the tower had been clenched by a giant, unseen hand. The rest of the city fell quickly, shattering and crumbling, the sound of destruction loud and thrumming in Arthas's ears. He winced at the volume, but did not tear his eyes away. He had instigated the fall of Silvermoon. Had directed his Scourge
against it. But this-there was casualness about it, an ease...Silvermoon had been a hard-won prize. Archimonde appeared to be able to shatter the greatest of human cities without even being present. Arthas thought about Archimonde and Tichondrius. He scratched his chin thoughtfully. In his lap, Frostmourne glowed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Kel'Thuzad, Arthas mused as he waited atop the verdant hill for the one he had been assured would come, was a useful lich to have around. He was utterly loyal to the Lich King, even to the point of convincingly playing the lapdog to Archimonde and Tichondrius while in their presence, if that was what was required to secretly serve. Arthas had opted for silence; he did not trust himself to lie as convincingly as Kel'Thuzad. The two demons had deemed them nonessential. They would soon see how wrong they were. Carelessly they had left the Book of Medivh in the lich's bony hands. In that mind, too, were spells and magic so powerful that Arthas knew he would never be able to fully grasp their scope. "The third part of the plan," Kel'Thuzad had said once the demons were gone, as idly as if he were conversing about the weather, "was the true heart of the Legion's plot." Arthas remembered what Kel'Thuzad had told him earlier. First had been the creation of the Scourge, then the summoning of Archimonde. He listened now with intense interest as Kel'Thuzad continued. "The Legion is after nothing less than the taking of all magic and the devouring of all life upon this world. And to that end, they plan to consume the concentrated, powerful energies contained within the elves' Well of Eternity. In order to accomplish this, they must destroy the single thing that contains within it the truest, purest essence of life energy on Azeroth. The Well of Eternity lies across the ocean, on the continent of Kalimdor. And the thing that would thwart the Legion is called Nordrassil...the World Tree. It grants the kaldorei immortality, and they are bound to it." "Kaldorei?" Arthas was confused. "I know of quel'dorei. Are they another race of elves?" "The original race," Kel'Thuzad corrected. He waved a hand dismissively. "But those details are of no consequence. What matters is that we must stop the Legion from achieving this goal. And there is one among the kaldorei who would aid us."
And so it was that using his magics, Kel'Thuzad had teleported Arthas to this distant continent and this hill that afforded an expansive view. The forests here were lush, healthy, but Arthas could already see what the Legion had wrought in the distance. Where the land, trees, beasts were not dead, they had been corrupted. Devour all life, indeed. A figure crested another hill below him, and Arthas smiled to himself. This was the one whose arrival he had been awaiting. They were certainly different, these "night elves." This one's skin was pale lavender, etched with swirling tattoos and scars cut into the skin in ritualistic patterns. A black cloth was tied around his eyes, but he appeared to have no difficulty in navigating the terrain. He carried a weapon that resembled nothing Arthas had ever seen. Instead of a traditional sword, which would be grasped by a hilt with a blade extending from it, this weapon had two jagged blades that glowed the sick green hue of something tainted with demonic energies. So, this one had trafficked with demons before. Arthas waited a while, observing. The night elf-Illidan Stormrage, Kel'Thuzad had said his name was-raged to himself. Apparently the list of wrongs piled against him was a lengthy one, and he ached for vengeance and power as much as Kel'Thuzad had said he would. Arthas smiled. "I am free after ten thousand years, yet still my own brother thinks I am a villain!" Illidan ranted. "I'll show him my true power. I'll show him the demons have no hold over me!" "Are you certain of that, demon hunter?" Arthas said, his voice carrying. The night elf whirled, brandishing his weapon. "Are you certain your will is your own?" The elf might have been blind in the traditional sense, but Arthas felt seen regardless. Illidan sniffed and growled. "You reek of death, human. You'll regret approaching me." Arthas grinned. He was itching for a good one-on-one fight. "Come then," he invited. "You'll find that we're evenly matched." Invincible reared and galloped down the hill, as eager for action as his master was. Illidan growled and ran to meet him. It was almost like a dance, Arthas mused as the two warriors faced each other. Illidan was strong and graceful, his skills demonically enhanced. But Arthas, too, was no mere soldier, nor was Frostmourne an ordinary blade.
The fight was fierce and swift; Arthas had been right. They were indeed evenly matched. After too short a time, both combatants fell back, breathing heavily. "We could go on fighting like this forever," Illidan said. "What is it you truly want?" Arthas lowered Frostmourne. "From your muttering earlier, I hear that you and your allies are beset by the undead. The dreadlord who commands this undead army is called Tichondrius. He controls a powerful warlock artifact called the Skull of Gul'dan. It is responsible for corrupting these forests." Illidan cocked his head. "And you wish for me to steal it? Why?" Arthas's white brows lifted. This one was indeed quick. He deserved a semi-truthful answer, Arthas decided. "Let's just say that I have no love for Tichondrius, and the lord I serve would...benefit from the Legion's downfall." "Why should I believe anything you say, little human?" Arthas shrugged. "A fair question. Let me answer. My master sees all, demon hunter. He knows that you've sought power your whole life. Now it lies within your grasp!" His gauntleted hand clenched into a fist in front of Illidan's blindfolded face and, as he expected, the night elf's head turned toward the gesture. "Seize it, and your enemies will be undone." Illidan lifted his head slowly and turned his face to Arthas. He was unsettling, this blind man who could so obviously see. The elf stepped back, nodding thoughtfully. Without another word Arthas turned Invincible's head around and galloped off. Kel'Thuzad would summon him back shortly. All had gone according to the Lich King's plan. He only hoped that Illidan had been as fully obedient as he had seemed. If not...there could be complications.
 
She was nothing of the living. Nor did she have the power to resist the commands of the one who had brought her screaming into this new existence. But Sylvanas Windrunner had will. Somehow, Arthas had not broken that. He had done so with others; why was she, seemingly, the only one who had not caved utterly to him? Was it her own strength, or was it because he enjoyed tormenting her? The banshee that she was now would likely never know. But if her will was her own because Arthas found it amusing, she
would have the last laugh. So she had vowed to herself, and Sylvanas always kept her promises. Time had passed in the world of the living since Arthas Menethil and the Scourge had swept through her beloved homeland. And much had occurred. Her so-called "master" had objected to being used as a pawn. Together with that arrogant, floating sack of bones, Kel'Thuzad-the one responsible for corrupting the glorious Sunwell-Arthas had conspired against both the dreadlord Tichondrius and the demon lord Archimonde, whom Kel'Thuzad himself had helped usher into Azeroth. Sylvanas had paid keen attention; anything Arthas had to reveal about the way he thought and the way he battled was useful to her. He had not attempted to slay Tichondrius himself, as he had Mal'Ganis. Oh no, the wily once-human prince had tricked another into doing his dirty work for him. Illidan, the luckless being had been named. Arthas had been able to smell Illidan's hunger for power and used that against him, goading him into stealing the Skull of Gul'dan, a legendary orcish warlock. To do so, Illidan would have to kill Tichondrius. Arthas would be rid of the demon lord, and Illidan would be rewarded with an artifact to sate his lust for power. Presumably all had gone according to plan. Arthas-and therefore Sylvanas -had heard nothing of Illidan since. As for Archimonde...so mighty that he had been able to destroy Dalaran, the great mage city, with a single spell, he had fallen to the power of the life he had come here to consume. Sylvanas now hated the living with the same passion the Legion had had, and thus it was with mixed feelings that she learned of his fall. The night elves had sacrificed their immortality to defeat him. The pure, focused power of nature had destroyed the demon from inside, and then the World Tree had surrendered its vast power in a cataclysm that sent out a massive shock wave. And when Archimonde had fallen, his skeleton all that was left, so too had the Legion's attempt to gain a foothold in this world been defeated. Sylvanas returned her attention from her reverie to the present, as the name of the late unlamented demon lord caught her ear. "It's been months since we last heard from Lord Archimonde," their leader, Detheroc, said. He stamped his hoof impatiently. "I grow tired of watching over these rotting undead! What are we still doing here?" They were in what had once been the gardens of the palace, where Arthas had strode so long and so short a time ago to murder his own father and
unleash doom on his own people. The gardens, too, were rotting as well as their populace. "We were charged with overseeing this land, Detheroc," chided the one named Balnazzar. "It is our duty to remain here and ensure that the Scourge is ready for action." "True," rumbled the third, Varimathras. "Although we should have received some kind of orders by now." Sylvanas could hardly believe what she had just heard. She turned to Kel'Thuzad. She despised him as much as she despised the death knight he appeared to serve so willingly, but she hid her dislike well. "The Legion was defeated months ago," she said quietly. "How could they not know?" "Impossible to say," the lich replied. "But the longer they remain in command, the more they run the Scourge into the ground. If something is not -" He was interrupted by a sound Sylvanas had never expected to hear in this place-the distinctive sound of a gate being battered and broken. Both undead turned at the noise, and the demons growled angrily, instantly alert, black webbed wings flexing. Sylvanas's glowing, spectral eyes widened slightly as none other than Arthas himself emerged through the gate. His familiar undead steed all but pranced beneath him. He wore no helm, letting his white hair fall freely about his pale face, and he wore that self-satisfied smirk that Sylvanas so despised. Her insubstantial hands attempted to clench into fists, but such was his control over her that all her fingers could manage was a brief twitch. Arthas's voice was resonant and cheerful. "Greetings, dreadlords," he said. They stared at him, visibly bridling at his insolence. "I should thank you for looking after my kingdom during my absence. However, I won't be requiring your services any longer." For a second, they simply gaped at him. Finally, Balnazzar recovered enough to retort, "This land is ours. The Scourge belongs to the Legion!" Ah, thought Sylvanas, here it comes. Arthas's smirk widened. His voice was positively gleeful. "Not anymore, demon. Your masters have been defeated. The Legion is undone. Your deaths will complete the circle." Still grinning, he lifted Frostmourne. The runes along its blade danced and glowed. He tightened the reins and the skeletal horse bore down on the cluster of three demons.
"This isn't over, human!" Detheroc cried defiantly. The dreadlords were faster than Arthas's skeletal horse-Frostmourne sang only of frustration as it sliced through empty air. The demons had created a portal and vanished to safety. Arthas scowled, but his good humor returned quickly. Sylvanas realized it was because he had them on the run and their deaths would likely be only a matter of time. He looked up and caught Sylvanas's eye, beckoning her to him. She was forced to obey. Kel'Thuzad needed no coercion, floating happily to his master's side like an obedient cur. "We knew you would return to us, Prince Arthas!" the lich enthused. Arthas barely spared his loyal servant a glance. His gaze was fixed on Sylvanas. "My heart is moved," he said sarcastically. "Did you, too, know I would return, little banshee?" "I did," Sylvanas said coldly. It was true; he had to, or else she would never have her chance for revenge. He twitched a finger, demanding more from her, and she gasped as pain shuddered through her. "Prince Arthas," she added. "Ah, but you will now address me as king. This is, after all, my land. I was born to rule and I shall. Once the-" He broke off, inhaling sharply. His eyes widened and then his face contorted in pain. He hunched over the bony neck of his horse, his gauntleted hands clenching hard on the reins. A sharp cry of agony was wrenched from him. Sylvanas watched, experiencing the most pleasure she had known since that dreadful day when Quel'Thalas had fallen. She drank in his pain like nectar. She had no idea why he was suffering so, but she savored every second of it. Grunting, he lifted his head. His eyes stared at something she couldn't see, and he extended an imploring hand toward it. "The pain...is unbearable," Arthas growled through gritted teeth. "What is happening to me?" He appeared to listen, as if an unheard voice was replying. "King Arthas!" Kel'Thuzad cried. "Do you need assistance?" Arthas didn't reply at once. He gasped for breath, then slowly sat up, visibly composing himself. "No...no, the pain has passed but...my powers... are diminished." His voice was full of puzzlement. Had Sylvanas still possessed a beating heart, it would have leaped at the words. "Something is terribly wrong here. I-"
The pain took him again. His body spasmed, his head falling back as his mouth opened in a soundless cry of pain, the veins on his neck standing out like cords. Kel'Thuzad fluttered around his adored master like a fussy nursemaid. Sylvanas simply watched coldly until the spasm had passed. Slowly, carefully, he slid off Invincible. His booted feet hit the flagstones, slipped out from under him and he fell, hard. The lich reached out a skeletal hand to help the prince-no, self-styled king-to his feet. "My old quarters," gasped Arthas. "I need rest-and then I have a long journey to prepare for." Sylvanas watched him go, staggering weakly in the direction of the rooms he had grown up in. She let her lips curve into a smile.... ...and the spectral fingers on her hands twitched for a moment, then curled up into angry fists.
 
It was oddly peaceful in Silverpine. Soft mists swirled gently near the moist, pine-needle-covered earth. Sylvanas knew that if she had possessed physical feet, she would have felt it soft and springy beneath them; would have inhaled a rich evergreen scent from the moist air. But she felt nothing, smelled nothing. She floated, insubstantial, toward the meeting site. And such was her eagerness for the meeting that at this moment she did not regret her lack of senses. Arthas had enjoyed turning beautiful, proud, strong-willed quel'dorei women into banshees, after his "success" with her. He had given them to she who had been their ranger-general in life, to control and command, tossing her a bone like she was a faithful hound. He would shortly see how faithful a pet she was. After overhearing the dreadlords' conversation earlier, she had sent one of her banshees after them to speak with them and gather information. The demons had accepted her emissary with pleasure, and had asked for her mistress to join them tonight to discuss something of "mutual benefit regarding the Banshee Queen's current status." In the depths of the forest, she could see a faint green glow, and floated toward it. Sure enough, they awaited her as they had said they would-three great demons turning to her, their wings flapping and betraying their agitation. Balnazzar spoke first. "Lady Sylvanas, we are pleased that you came."
"How could I not?" she responded. "For some reason I no longer hear the Lich King's voice in my head. My will is my own once again." It was indeed; and it was purely by that will that she kept the elation from her voice. She did not wish them to know more than she chose. "You dreadlords seem to know why." They exchanged glances, their faces curving into smiles. "We've discovered that the Lich King is losing his power," Varimathras said, hellish glee in his voice. "As it wanes, so too does his ability to command undead such as you." That was good news indeed, if it were actually true. But it was not specific enough for Sylvanas. "And what of King Arthas?" she pressed, unable to keep a sneer out of her voice as she used the death knight's title. "What about his powers?" Balnazzar waved a black-clawed hand dismissively. "He will cease to annoy us, like a summerfly whose time has come and gone. Though his runeblade, Frostmourne, carries powerful enchantments, Arthas's own powers will fade in time. It is inevitable." Sylvanas was not so certain. She, too, had once underestimated Arthas, and along with the cold hatred in her heart, she also bore guilt for her part in his blood-soaked victory. "You seek to overthrow him, and want my help to do it," she said bluntly. Detheroc, the one who appeared to be in charge, had stood quietly by while his brothers spoke to Sylvanas. They had been angry and impassioned, but his expression had remained neutral. Now, at last he spoke, in cold tones of utter loathing. "The Legion may be defeated, but we are the nathrezim. We'll not let some upstart human get the best of us." He paused, looking at them each in turn. "Arthas must fall!" The glowing green gaze settled upon Sylvanas. "As you have been watching us, little ghost, so have we been observing as well. It is obvious that the lich, Kel'Thuzad, is far too loyal to betray his master. There appears to be...affection between the two." His gray lips curved in a dangerous smile. "But you, on the other hand..." "Hate him." She did not think she could hide that truth even if she wanted to, so fiercely did it burn inside her. "We are united in that much, dreadlord. I have my own reasons for seeking vengeance. Arthas murdered my people and turned me into this...monstrosity." She paused for a moment, the
loathing-of both Arthas and what he had done to her-so intense it took away her ability to speak. They waited, patiently, smugly. They thought they could use her. They would be wrong. "I may take part in your bloody coup, but I will do so in my own way." She wanted them as allies, but they needed to know that she would be no toy. "I will not exchange one master for another. If you wish my aid, then you must accept that." Detheroc smiled. "We will slay the death knight together, then." Sylvanas nodded, and a slow smile crept across her ghostly face. Your days have numbers, King Arthas Menethil. And I...I am the hourglass.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Arthas rubbed his temple, going over and over the visions he had seen. Always before, communication from the Lich King had come only from Frostmourne. But the instant the crippling pain had struck him, Arthas had actually seen the being he served for the first time. The Lich King was alone, in the middle of a vast cavern, as imprisoned in the unnatural ice as Frostmourne had been. But this had been no sleek covering of his form. The encasing ice had been fractured, as if someone had broken off a piece and left the jagged remains behind. Obscured by the ice as he was, the Lich King was imperfectly glimpsed, but his voice sliced in the death knight's mind as he cried out in torment: "Danger draws near the Frozen Throne! Power is fading.... Time is running out.... You must return to Northrend immediately!" And then, piercing Arthas like a lance in the gut: "Obey!" Each time it happened, Arthas felt dazed and sick. The power that had pumped through him like adrenaline when he was merely human was receding, taking with it more than it had originally given. He was weak and vulnerable...something he had never once imagined he would be when he first grasped Frostmourne and turned away from everything he thought he believed in. His face was greasy with sweat as he laboriously mounted Invincible and rode to meet Kel'Thuzad. The lich was waiting for him, hovering, his fluttering robes and general demeanor somehow radiating concern. "So the seizures have been getting worse?" he asked. Arthas hesitated. Should he take the lich into his confidence? Would Kel'Thuzad attempt to wrest power from him? No, he decided. The former necromancer had never led him astray. Always, his loyalty was to the Lich King and Arthas himself. The king nodded. He felt like his head would come off with the gesture. "Yes. With my powers drained, I can barely command my own warriors. The Lich King warned me that if I didn't reach Northrend soon, all could be lost.
We must depart quickly." If it was possible for blazing, empty eye sockets to exude worry, then Kel'Thuzad's did so now. "Of course, Your Majesty. You have not and will not be forsaken. We will depart as soon as you believe you are-" "There's been a change of plans, King Arthas. You're not going anywhere." It was evidence of his weakening powers that he had not even sensed them. Arthas stared, utterly taken by surprise as the three dreadlords surrounded him. "Assassins!" cried Kel'Thuzad. "It's a trap! Defend your king from those -" But the sound of a gate slamming shut drowned out the lich's call to action. Arthas drew Frostmourne. For the first time since he had touched, had bonded with the sword, it felt heavy and almost lifeless in his hands. The runes along its blade barely gleamed at all, and it felt more like a lump of metal than the well-balanced, beautiful weapon it had always been. The undead rushed at him, and for a wild moment Arthas was catapulted back in time to his first encounter with the walking dead. He was again standing outside the little farmhouse, assaulted by the stench of decay and almost numbed with horror as things that should have been dead attacked him. He had long since moved past any horror or repugnance at their existence; indeed, he had come to think of them with affection. They were his subjects; he had cleansed them of life, to serve the great glory of the Lich King. It was not that they moved, or fought; it was that they fought him. They were utterly under the control of dreadlords. Grimly, using all the strength he yet possessed, he fought them back, a strange, sickening sensation filling him. He had never expected they would turn on him. Over the sounds of the conflict, Balnazzar's voice reached Arthas, the tone gloating. "You should never have returned, human. Weakened as you are, we have assumed control over the majority of your warriors. It seems your reign was short-lived, King Arthas." Arthas gritted his teeth and from somewhere deep inside him dredged up more energy, more will to fight. He would not die here. But there were so many of them-so many that he had once nearly effortlessly directed and commanded, now turning implacably against him. He knew they were mindless, that they would obey whoever was the strongest. And yet somehow...it hurt. He'd made them....
He was growing increasingly weak, and at one point was even unable to block a blow directly to his midsection. The dull sword clanged against his armor, and he suffered no major wound, but that the ghoul had gotten past his defenses alarmed him. "There are too many of them, my king!" Kel'Thuzad's sepulchral voice said, the tenor of loyalty in it bringing unexpected tears to Arthas's eyes. "Flee-escape from the city! I'll find my way out and meet you in the wilderness. It is your only chance, my liege!" He knew the lich was right. With a cry, Arthas clumsily dismounted. A wave of his hand and Invincible became insubstantial, a ghost horse instead of a skeletal one, and disappeared. Arthas would summon him again when he was safely away. He charged, gripping the enfeebled Frostmourne in both hands and swinging, no longer trying to kill or even wound his opponents- they were indeed too many-but simply to clear a path. The gates were closed, but this palace was where he had grown to manhood, and he knew it intimately. Knew every gate, wall, and hidden passageway, and instead of heading for the gates, which he would be unable to raise by himself, he went deeper into the palace. The undead followed. Arthas raced through the back corridors that had once been the private quarters of the royal family, which he had once traversed with Jaina's hand clasped tightly in his. He stumbled and his mind reeled. How had he come to this moment-fleeing through an empty palace from his own creations, his subjects, whom he had vowed to protect. But no-he'd slain them. Betrayed his subjects for the power the Lich King offered. The power that was now bleeding from him as if from a wound that could not be closed. Father...Jaina... He closed his mind against the memories. Distractions would not serve him. Only speed and cunning would. The narrow passageways limited the number of undead able to follow, and he was able to close and bolt the doors against them, delaying them. Finally he reached his quarters and the secret exit built into the wall. He, his parents, and Calia each had one...known only to them, Uther, and the bishop. All were gone now, save he, and Arthas pushed aside the hanging tapestry to reveal the small door hidden behind it, closing and bolting it behind him. He ran, stumbling in his weakness, down the tight, twining staircase that would lead to his freedom. The door was both physically and magically
disguised to look exactly like the main walls of the palace from the outside. Arthas, gasping, fumbled with the bolt and half fell out into the dim light of Tirisfal Glades. The sound of battle reached his ears and he looked up, catching his breath. He blinked, confused. The undead...were fighting one another. Of course-some of them were still under his command. Were still his subjects- His tools. His weapons. Not his subjects. He watched for a moment, leaning against the cold stone. An abomination under the control of his enemy lopped off a long-eared head and sent it flying. A shiver of disgust went through him at the sight of both sets of undead. Decomposing, maggot-ridden, shambling things. No matter who controlled them, they were foul. A glimmer caught his eye; a forlorn little ghost, hovering timidly, who had once been an adolescent girl. Once been alive. He'd killed her, too, directly or indirectly. His subject. She seemed still connected to that world of the living. Seemed to remember what being human had once meant. He could use that; use her. He extended his hand to this floating, spectral thing he had made out of his lust for power. "I have need of your abilities, little shade," he said, pitching his voice to sound as kindly as possible. "Will you help me?" Her face lit up and she floated to his side. "I live only to serve you, King Arthas," she said, her voice still sweet despite its hollow echo. He forced himself to return her smile. It was easier, when they were simply rotting flesh. But this had its advantages, too. Through sheer will, he summoned more and more of them, exerting himself so hard his breath came in gasps. They came. They would serve whoever was strongest. With a roar, Arthas descended upon those who would dare stand in the way of the destiny he had bought so dearly. But even as more came to his side, so did more come to attack him. Weak, so weak he was, with only these lumps of meat to protect him. He was shaking and gasping, heaving Frostmourne about with arms that grew increasingly weary. The earth trembled and Arthas whirled to behold no fewer than three abominations lumbering toward him. Grimly, he lifted Frostmourne. He, Arthas Menethil, King of Lordaeron, would not go down without a fight. Suddenly there was a flurry of motion, accompanied by anguished cries. Like the ghosts of birds, the blurs dipped and dove, harrying the
monstrosities who paused in their pursuit of Arthas to bat and roar at the spectral figures, who suddenly seemed to dive right inside the creatures. The slimy, white, maggoty things froze, and then abruptly turned their attention to the shambling ghouls that were attacking Arthas. A grin spread across the death knight's pale face. The banshees. He had thought Sylvanas too lost in her hatred to come to his aid, or worse, like so many of his warriors, turned to become a pawn of his enemies. But it would seem that the former ranger-general's irritation with him was spent. With the aid of the banshee-possessed abominations, the tide quickly turned, and a few moments later Arthas stood, weaving with a sudden weakness over a pile of corpses that were truly dead. The abominations turned on one another and hacked themselves to grisly bits. Arthas wondered if even their creators could have sewn back what was left of them. As they fell to the earth, the spirits that had possessed them darted free. "You have my thanks, my ladies. I am glad to see that you and your mistress remain among my allies." They hovered, their voices soft and haunting. "Indeed, great king. She sent us to find you. We've come to escort you across the river. Once we cross it we'll take refuge in the wilderness." The wilderness-the same phrase Kel'Thuzad had used. Arthas relaxed even further. Clearly, his right and left hand were in agreement. He lifted a hand and concentrated. "Invincible, to me!" he called. A moment later a small patch of mist appeared, swirling and taking on the shape of a skeletal horse. A heartbeat later, Invincible was there in reality. Arthas was pleased to notice that the act took little effort; Invincible loved him. This was the one thing he had done completely right. The one dead thing that would never, ever turn against him, any more than the great animal would have done in its life. Carefully, he mounted, doing his best to hide his weakness from the banshees and the other undead. "Lead me to your mistress and Kel'Thuzad, and I shall follow," he said. They did, floating away from the palace and deep into the heart of Tirisfal Glades. Arthas noticed with a sudden unease that the path they were taking led uncomfortably near the Balnir farm. Fortunately, the banshees veered off, heading into a hillier area and through there to a wide-open field. "This is the place, sisters. We'll rest here, great king." There was no sign of Sylvanas, nor of Kel'Thuzad. Arthas drew rein on Invincible, looking around. He felt a sudden prickling of apprehension. "Why
here?" he demanded. "Where is your mistress?" The pain descended again and he cried out, clutching his chest. Invincible pranced beneath him, anxious, and Arthas clung on for dear life. The graygreen glade went away, replaced by the blues and whites of the oddly broken Frozen Throne. The Lich King's voice stabbed in his head and Arthas bit back a whimper. "You have been deceived! Come to my side at once! Obey!" "What is...happening here?" Arthas managed through gritted teeth. He blinked, forcing his vision to clear, and lifted his head, grunting with the effort. She stepped out from behind the trees, carrying a bow. For a wild second, he thought he was back in Quel'Thalas, facing the living elf. But her hair was no longer golden, but black as midnight with streaks of white. Her skin was pale with a bluish tinge to it, and her eyes glowed silver. It was Sylvanas, and yet it was not. For this Sylvanas was neither alive, nor incorporeal. Somehow, she had gotten her body back from where he had ordered it left- safely locked in an iron coffin to be used as additional torment against her. But she had turned the tables on him. As he struggled to make sense of what was happening through the pain, Sylvanas lifted her sleek black bow, drew, and took aim. Her lips curved in a smile. "You walked right into this one, Arthas." She released the arrow. It impaled his left shoulder, piercing through his armor as if it were as flimsy as parchment, adding a fresh type of agony. He was confused for an instant-Sylvanas was a master archer. She couldn't possibly miss a fatal shot at this distance. Why the shoulder? His right hand went up automatically, but he found he couldn't even curl his fingers around the shaft. They were becoming numb-as were his feet, his legs... He flung himself onto Invincible's neck, draping and doing what he could to cling to his mount with limbs that were rapidly becoming useless. He could barely turn his head to stare at her and rasp out the words, "Traitor! What have you done to me?" She was smiling. She was happy. Slowly, languorously, she strode toward him. She was wearing the same outfit she had when he had killed her, revealing a great deal of her pale blue-white skin. Oddly, though, her body bore no scars from the innumerable wounds she had received on that day.
"It's a special poisoned arrow I made just for you," she said as she approached him. She shifted the bow to her back and drew a dagger, fingering it. "The paralysis you're experiencing now is but a fraction of the agony you've caused me." Arthas swallowed. His mouth was dry as sand. "Finish me, then." She threw back her head and laughed, hollow and ghostly. "A quick death...like the one you gave me?" Her mirth faded as quickly as it had come, and her eyes flashed red. She continued her approach until she was only an arm's length away. Invincible pranced uncertainly at her proximity, and Arthas's heart lurched as he almost slipped off. "Oh no. You have taught me well, Arthas Menethil. You taught me about the folly of showing mercy to my enemies, and the delight of exacting torment from them. And so, my tutor, I'll show you how well I learned those lessons. You're going to suffer as I did. Thanks to my arrow, you can't even run." Arthas's eyes seemed to be the only thing that could move, and he watched helplessly as she lifted the dagger. "Give my regards to hell, you son of a bitch." No. Not this way-not paralyzed and helpless...Jaina... Sylvanas suddenly staggered back, the pale hand that clutched the dagger twisting and opening. The look on her face was utter astonishment. A heartbeat later, the little shade that had come to Arthas's aid earlier materialized, smiling happily at the thought that she had helped to save her king. Happy to serve. "Back, you mindless ones! You shall not fall today, my king!" Kel'Thuzad! He had come as he had promised, finding Arthas all the way out here where the traitorous banshee had lured him. And he had not come alone. Well over a dozen undead were with him, and they now launched themselves at Sylvanas and her banshees. Hope rose inside him, but he was still paralyzed, still unable to move. He watched as the fight raged around him, and in a few moments it was obvious that Sylvanas would need to retreat. She shot him a look, and again her eyes flashed red. "This isn't over, Arthas! I'll never stop hunting you." Arthas was looking directly at her as she seemed to melt into the shadows. The last parts of her to vanish were her crimson eyes. With their mistress gone, the other banshees under Sylvanas's command disappeared as
well. Kel'Thuzad hastened to Arthas's side. "Did she harm you, my liege?" Arthas could only stare at him, the paralysis so far gone he could not even move his lips. Bony hands folded with surprising delicacy around the arrow and tugged. Arthas bit back a cry of pain as the arrow came free. His red blood was mixed with a gooey black substance, which Kel'Thuzad examined carefully. "The effects of her arrow will wear off in time. It seems the poison was meant only to immobilize you." Of course, Arthas thought; otherwise she would not have needed the dagger. Relief shuddered through him, leaving him even more exhausted. He had come very close-too close-to his death. If not for the loyalty of the lich, the elf would have had him. He tried again to speak and managed, "I- you saved me." Kel'Thuzad inclined his horned head. "I am grateful I could be of assistance, my king. But you must hasten from this place, to Northrend. All the preparations for your journey have been made. What is it you would have of me?" Kel'Thuzad had been right. Even now, Arthas was beginning to feel some semblance of life returning to his limbs, though not enough that he could move under his own power. "I need to find the Lich King as soon as possible. Much longer and...I don't know what the future holds, or if I'll even return, but I want you to watch over this land. See to it that my legacy endures." He trusted the lich, not out of affection or loyalty, but simply as a cold, hard fact. Kel'Thuzad was an undead thing, bound to the master they both served. Arthas's eyes flitted to the little ghost, hovering, smiling, a few feet away, and to the slack-faced, rotting corpses who would walk off a cliff if he told them to. Just dead meat and sundered spirits. Not subjects. And they never had been. No matter what the little shade's smile said. "You honor me, my liege. I shall do as you ask, King Arthas. I shall."
 
She had a body now, what her own had once been, though changed, as she had been changed. Sylvanas walked with the same easy stride she had had in life, wore the same armor. But it was not the same. She was forever,
irrevocably altered. "You seem troubled, mistress." Sylvanas started from her reverie and turned to the banshee, one of the many who floated beside her. She could float with them, but she preferred the heaviness, the solidity, of the corporeal form she had stolen back for herself. "Aren't you, sister?" she answered curtly. "Only days ago we were the Lich King's slaves. We existed only to slaughter in his name. And now we are...free." "I don't understand, mistress." The banshee's voice was hollow and confused. "Our wills are our own now. Is that not what you fought for? I thought you'd be overjoyed." Sylvanas laughed, aware that it was perilously close to hysteria. "What joy is there in this curse? We are still undead, sister-still monstrosities." She extended a hand, examined the blue-gray flesh, noticed the cold that clung to her like a second skin. "What are we if not slaves to this torment?" He had taken so much. Even if she extended his death over a period of days...weeks...she would never be able to make Arthas suffer sufficiently. His death would not bring back the dead, cleanse the Sunwell, nor restore her to her living, peach-and-gold self. But it would feel...very good. He had eluded her at their confrontation several days past. His lackey, the lich, had come at precisely the wrong moment. Arthas had gone far beyond her grasp now, trying to heal himself. She had learned that he'd left Kel'Thuzad in control of these plagued lands. But that was all right. She was dead. She had all the time in the world to plot an exquisite revenge. A movement caught her eye and she got gracefully to her feet, drawing the bow and nocking it in one single, swift movement. The swirling portal opened and Varimathras stood there, grinning patronizingly down at her. "Greetings, Lady Sylvanas." The demon actually bowed. Sylvanas raised an eyebrow. She did not for a minute think he meant it. "My brothers and I appreciate the role you played in overthrowing Arthas." The role she played. Like this was some sort of theatrical game. "Overthrow? I suppose one could call it that. He has scurried away, that much is sure." The mighty being shrugged, his wings spreading slightly with the gesture. "Either way, he no longer troubles us. I've come to offer you a formal invitation to join our new order." A "new order." Not very new at all, she mused; same subjugation,
different master. She could not have been less interested. "Varimathras," she said coldly. She did not bow in return. "My only interest was in seeing Arthas dead. Since I failed in my first attempt at this goal, I now wish to concentrate my efforts on succeeding the next time. I have no time for your petty politics or power mongering." The demon bridled. "Careful, milady. It would be unwise to incur our wrath. We are the future of these...Plaguelands. You can either join us and rule, or be cast aside." "You? The future? Kel'Thuzad did not go with his precious Arthas. He was left here for a reason. But perhaps a lich reborn by the very essence of the mighty Sunwell is nothing to beings as powerful as you." Her voice dripped scorn, and the dreadlord frowned terribly. "I've lived as a slave long enough, dreadlord." Funny, how one used the word "lived," even though one was dead. Old habits died hard, it would seem. "I have fought tooth and nail to become more than what that bastard made me. I have my own will now, and I choose my own path. The Legion is defeated. You are the last pathetic remnants. You are a dying breed. I won't relinquish my freedom by shackling myself to you fools." "So be it," Varimathras hissed. He was furious. "Our reply will come soon." He teleported out, his face twisted in a scowl. Her needling had gotten to him, and he fairly quivered with outrage. She noted this dispassionately. He was easy to anger; he was the one they had sent to her, thinking her no great threat. She would need more than a handful of banshees to fight Arthas. She would need an army, a city of the dead...she would need Lordaeron. The Forsaken, she would call these lost souls who, like her, did not breathe but who yet had their own will. And even more immediately, she would need more than her spectral sisters to fight the three demonic brothers. Or maybe there would be only two she needed to fight. Sylvanas Windrunner thought again of Varimathras, how easy he was to manipulate. Perhaps this one could be useful.... Yes. She and the Forsaken would find their own path in this world...and would slaughter anyone who stood in their way.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Northrend. There was an odd sense of coming home. As the shore came into view, Arthas remembered the first time he had arrived here, his heart full of pain at Jaina and Uther's betrayal, aching at the necessity of what he had been forced to do at Stratholme. So much had happened that it felt like a lifetime ago. He had come then with vengeance in his heart, to kill the demon lord responsible for turning his people into the walking dead. Now, he ruled those walking dead and was allies with Kel'Thuzad. Strange, the twists and turns of fate. He did not feel the cold, as he had then. Nor did the men who had followed him so loyally; death dulled sensations for such things. Only the human necromancers bundled up against the icy wind that sighed and moaned and the snow that began to drift lazily downward as they made anchor and debarked. Arthas moved stiffly from the rowboat onto the shore. He might not feel the cold of this place, but his powers, and his physical self, were weak. As soon as his feet touched the earth, Arthas felt him-the Lich King. Not in his mind, not speaking to him through Frostmourne, although the runeblade's feeble glow strengthened slightly. No, Arthas sensed him here, his master, as he had not before. And there was a prickling sensation of increased threat. He turned back to the rest of those who were following him ashore- ghouls, specters, shades, abominations, necromancers. "We must make haste," he cried. "Something out there is threatening the Lich King. We must reach Icecrown quickly." "My lord!" one of the necromancers cried, and pointed. Arthas whirled, drawing Frostmourne. Through the veil of the falling snow he could see golden-red shapes hovering in the air. They drew closer, and his eyes narrowed in surprise and anger as he recognized the creatures and realized who their masters must be. Dragonhawks. He was astonished. He had all but exterminated the high elves. How could it be that any of them survived sufficiently to regroup, let
alone determine where he had gone and confront him here? A slow smile spread across his handsome features, and he felt the sneaking sensation of admiration. The dragonhawks came closer. He lifted Frostmourne in salute. "I have to admit," he shouted, "I am surprised to see quel'dorei here. I would have thought the cold too unpleasant for so delicate a people." "Prince Arthas!" The voice came from one of the riders, its beast hovering above Arthas. His voice rang clear and bright and strong. "You still do not see quel'dorei here. We are the sin'dorei-the blood elves! We have sworn to avenge the ghosts of Quel'Thalas. This dead land...will be cleansed! The disgusting things you have created will rest properly at last. And you, butcher, will finally receive your just punishment." He was amused for a moment. Their numbers were not insignificant. Arthas realized that he was most likely looking at the last few of an all but extinct race. And they'd come just for him? Then his smugness faded into irritation. Despite his wearied state, anger filled his voice as he cried, "Northrend belongs to the Scourge, elf, and you will soon join them! You made a terrible mistake by coming here!" More dragonhawks appeared, along with rangers on foot. Arrows flew through the skies, seemingly as numerous as snowflakes, peppering the undead as they charged. Most of them, however, did not fall; the sting of arrows, as long as it did not pierce a vital spot, troubled them not at all. Not bothering to even mount Invincible, Arthas charged in. Frostmourne hungered; it seemed to gather energy and strength, as did Arthas himself, with each of the bright, shining souls it consumed. In the midst of the clamor of battle, he heard a voice that was deep and cold as Northrend itself call out from a hill above them. "Onward for the Scourge! Slay them in Ner'zhul's name!" Despite all he had seen, despite all he had done, Arthas felt a deep chill sweep over him at the sound of that bone-cold voice. He risked a quick glance upward and his eyes widened at what he beheld. Nerubians! Of course-this was their homeland. His heart lifted as they poured forth. He could make out their shapes through the snow, the familiar, unsettling, scuttling speed with which the spidery beings descended on their prey. Arthas had to give these so-called sin'dorei credit-they fought valiantly-but they were hopelessly outnumbered, and soon Arthas was standing in a sea of red-and gold-clad bodies. He raised his hand, and one by
one, the dead elves twitched and lurched to their feet, staring at him glassyeyed. "More soldiers for the one we serve," Arthas said. He looked again, and his eyes fell upon the nerubians' leader. He was larger than those he commanded, towering over them as he moved easily down the snowy landscape toward Arthas. He moved among them like the king he was, with deliberateness and precision. Arthas tried to find something familiar in something so incredibly alien to him; to the human's eyes, Anub'arak looked like a cross between a beetle and the other, more spidery-appearing nerubians he commanded. Arthas found that he had taken an unintentional step backward and forced himself to stay where he was as the creature approached. It kept coming until it was right in front of him, then loomed over him, gazing down with multiple eyes, a thing of utter horror. His ally. Arthas found his voice and forced it to be calm. "Thanks for the assistance, mighty one." The creature inclined its head, mandibles clacking gently as it spoke in that deep, sepulchral tone that still made Arthas uneasy. "The Lich King sent me to aid you, death knight. I am Anub'arak, ancient king of Azjol-Nerub. Where is the other?" It reared up on its hind legs, looking about. "Other?" "Kel'Thuzad," Anub'arak rumbled again in that hissing, sighing, reverberating voice. He lowered himself down and fixed Arthas with his multiple-eyed gaze. "I know him. I greeted him when he first came to serve the Lich King, as I greet you now." Arthas wondered briefly if Kel'Thuzad had felt as unsettled as he upon first encountering this undead, insectoid king of an ancient race. Surely he had been, he told himself. Surely anyone would be. "Your people were a welcome addition to our ranks the first time we attacked these elves," he said, glancing again at the fallen sin'dorei. He was very glad Anub'arak's "people" were on his side. "And I welcome your aid again now. But we have little time for pleasantries. Since the Lich King sent you, you must be aware that he is in danger. We must reach Icecrown immediately." "It is so," rumbled Anub'arak. He bobbed his fearsome head and shifted, extending two of his forelegs. "I will gather the rest of my people, and we will march together to protect our lord."
The massive creature moved off imperiously, summoning his obedient subjects who scurried to him eagerly. Arthas suppressed a shudder and nudged one of the bodies of the fallen elves. It had been ripped limb from limb, too badly damaged to be of use. "These elves are pathetic. It's no wonder we destroyed their homeland so easily." "Pity I wasn't there to stop you. It's been a long time, Arthas." The voice was musical, smooth, cultured...and laced with hatred. Arthas turned, recognizing it, startled and pleased to find its owner here. The twists and turns of fate indeed. "Prince Kael'thas," he said, grinning. The elf stood a few yards away, the shimmer of his teleportation spell still fading. Seemingly ageless, he looked exactly the same as Arthas remembered. No, not exactly. The blue eyes gleamed with suppressed anger. Not the hot rage he had seen upon the visage the last time they had encountered each other, but a cold, deep-seated fury. He no longer wore the purple and blue robes of the Kirin Tor, but the traditional crimson hues of his people. "Arthas Menethil." The elf did not use a title. He obviously meant it as a slight, but it bothered Arthas not at all. He knew well enough what he was, and soon, this too-pretty princeling would know it also. "I would spit at the thought of your name in my mouth, but you aren't even worth that." "Ah, Kael," Arthas said, grinning. "Even your insults are unnecessarily complicated. Glad to see you haven't changed-as ineffectual as ever. That raises a question. Why weren't you at Quel'Thalas anyway? Content to let other people die for you while you sat snug and secure in your Violet Citadel? I don't think you'll be doing that anymore." Kael'thas gritted his teeth, his eyes narrowing. "That much I will give you. I should have been there. I was instead trying to help the humans fight the Scourge-the Scourge you unleashed on your own people. You may not care for your subjects-but I care for mine. I have lost far, far too much in dealing with humans. I stand only for the elves now. For the sin'dorei-the children of the blood. You will pay, Arthas. You will pay dearly for what you have done!" "You know, I'm almost enjoying this banter. It's been a long time, hasn't it? I haven't seen you since..." He let the sentence trail away, watching as a muscle twitched near the elf prince's eye. Yes, Kael'thas remembered. Remembered stumbling across Jaina and Arthas locked in a deep kiss. The memory briefly unsettled Arthas as well, and the pleasure he took in
inflicting the torment upon Kael'thas soured ever so slightly. "I must say though, I'm rather disappointed in these elves you lead. I'd hoped for a better fight. Maybe I killed all the ones with spirit in Quel'Thalas." Kael didn't rise to the bait. "What you faced here was merely a scouting force. Don't worry, Arthas, you'll have a good challenge shortly. I assure you that defeating Lord Illidan's army will be far more difficult." The prince's full lips twisted in amusement as Arthas started at the name. "Illidan? He's behind this invasion?" Dammit. It would have been better if he had killed Tichondrius himself, rather than involving the kaldorei. He'd known Illidan was power hungry. He just hadn't realized that the night elf would evolve into so great a threat. "He is. Our forces are vast, Arthas." The silky, rich voice was laced now with delight. The bastard was really enjoying this. "Even now, they march upon Icecrown Glacier. You'll never make it in time to save your precious Lich King. Consider this payment for Quel'Thalas...and other insults." "Other insults?" Arthas grinned. "Perhaps you'd like the details of these other insults. Shall I tell you what it was like to hold her in my arms, to taste her, to hear her call out my-" The pain was worse than it had ever been before. Arthas crumpled to his knees. His vision went red. Again he saw the Lich King-Ner'zhul, he recalled Anub'arak had named him-trapped in the icy prison. "Make haste!" the Lich King cried. "My enemies draw near! Our time is almost spent!" "Are you well, death knight?" Arthas blinked and found himself staring up into the face, if it could be called that, of Anub'arak. A long arachnid leg was extended toward him, offering him assistance. He hesitated, but was too weak to rise unaided. Steeling himself, he gripped it and rose. It was like a stick in his hand, dried and almost-mummified to the touch. He let go as soon as he could stand by himself. "My powers are weakening, but I'll be all right." He took a steadying breath and glanced around. "Where is Kael'thas?" "Gone." The voice was cold as stone and laced with displeasure. "He used his magic to teleport away before we could rend him to pieces." The cowardly mage trick of teleportation again. If only Arthas's necromancers were capable of such, the Lich King would not be in the
danger he was in. Arthas recalled the other corpses and knew that such would indeed have been Kael'thas's fate. "I hate to say it," he said, "but the damned elf was right." He turned to his intimidating ally. "Anub'arak-I had another vision-the Lich King is in immediate peril. They're closing in on him- Illidan and Kael'thas. We'll never reach the glacier in time!" I've failed.... Anub'arak did not seem at all perturbed. "Overland, perhaps not," agreed the mammoth creature. "It is a long and arduous voyage. But...there is another route we might take, death knight. The ancient, shattered kingdom of Azjol-Nerub lies deep below us. It was where I once ruled for many years. I know its corridors and hidden places well. Though it has fallen on dark times, it could provide us a direct shortcut to the glacier." Arthas looked up. As the raven flew, it was not that long a journey. But across the ice and the mountains that reared up before them... "You're certain we can reach the glacier through these tunnels?" he asked. "Nothing is certain, death knight." For a moment, it sounded like the nerubian was smirking. "The ruins will be perilous. But it's worth the risk." Fallen on dark times. A curious phrase for an ancient, dead, spider-lord to use. Arthas wondered what that meant. He supposed he was about to find out. Anub'arak and his subjects set a brisk pace, heading due north. Arthas and his Scourge followers fell into step, and soon the ocean was left behind. The sun moved quickly across the dim sky, low on the horizon. The long night was coming. As they marched, Arthas sent some of his warriors to gather what tree limbs and sticks they could; they would burn through many a torch passing through this dangerous subterranean kingdom. After several hours of excruciatingly slow progress-the undead could not truly feel the cold, but the wind and snow slowed them-Arthas knew that despite Anub'arak's nearly wry words, one thing actually was certain. He never would have made it in time to save the Lich King-and thus himself- by heading overland. In the end, it was self-preservation that drove him so hard. The Lich King had found him, had made him into what he now was. Had granted him great power. Arthas knew and appreciated it, but his debt to the Lich King was nothing of loyalty. If this great being was slain, there was no doubt but that Arthas would be the next to die-and, as he had told Uther, he intended to live forever.
At last, they reached the gates. So covered with ice and snow were they that Arthas did not immediately recognize them as such, but Anub'arak halted, reared up, and spread wide two of his eight legs, indicating what lay ahead of them. Curved stone, looking like sickles-or insect legs, Arthas thought-jutted upward, their tips bending toward one another to form a sort of symbolic tunnel. Ahead, he could make out the gates themselves. A giant spider was etched upon them. Arthas's lip curled in disgust, but then he thought of the statues dotting Stormwind. Was this really so different? The entrance "tunnel" and the gates led into the heart of what seemed to be an iceberg. For a moment, just a moment, Arthas glanced at the silent, enormous figure of Anub'arak, thought about spiders and flies, and wondered if he was doing the right thing. "Behold the entrance to a once-powerful and ancient place," Anub'arak said. "I was lord here, and my word was obeyed without question. I was mighty and powerful, and I bowed to no one. But things change. I serve the Lich King now, and my place is defending him." Arthas thought briefly of his outrage at the plague, of his burning need for vengeance...of the look in his father's eyes as Frostmourne drank his soul. "Things do change," he said quietly. "But there's no time to reminisce." He turned to his strange new ally and smiled coldly. "Let us descend."
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Arthas did not know how long they spent beneath the frozen surface of Northrend, in the ancient and deadly nerubian kingdom. He only knew two things as he trudged out into the light, blinking like a bat forced out into the sun. One was that he hoped he was in time to defend the Lich King. The other was that he was grateful, bone-deep, to be out of that place. It had been clear that the nerubian kingdom had once been beautiful. Arthas was not sure what he had expected, but it had not been the haunting, vivid colors of blue and purple, nor the intricate geometric shapes that denoted different rooms and corridors. These still retained their beauty, but were like a preserved rose; something that while still lovely, was nonetheless dead. A strange smell wafted through the place as they walked. Arthas could not place it, nor even categorize it. It was acrid and stale at once, but not unpleasant, not to one used to the company of the decaying dead. It was likely in the end a shorter route, as Anub'arak had promised, but every step had been bought with blood. Soon after they had entered, they had come under attack. They scuttled out from the darkness, a dozen or more spider-beings chittering angrily as they descended. Anub'arak and his soldiers met them head-on. Arthas had hesitated for a fraction of a second, then joined in, ordering his troops to do the same. The vast caverns were filled with the shrieking and chittering of the nerubians, the guttural groans of the undead, and the agonized cries of the living necromancers as the nerubians attacked with gobbets of poison. Thick, sticky webbing trapped several of the fiercer corpses, holding them helpless until snapping mandibles lopped off heads or stiletto-sharp legs impaled and eviscerated them. Anub'arak was a nightmare incarnate. He uttered a dreadful, hollow sound in his guttural native language, and fell upon his former subjects with devastating consequences. His legs, each working separately, grabbed and impaled his hapless victims. Vicious pincers sheared off limbs. And the whole time, the stale air was filled with cries that made Arthas, inured to such
things as he was, shiver and swallow hard. The skirmish was violent and costly, but the nerubians eventually retreated to the shadows that had birthed them. Several of their number were left behind, eight legs squirming violently before the hapless arachnids curled up on themselves and died. "What the hell was that all about?" Arthas had asked, panting and whirling on Anub'arak. "These nerubians are your kin. Why are they hostile to us?" "Many of us who fell during the War of the Spider were brought back to serve the Lich King," Anub'arak had replied. "These warriors, however," and he waved a foreleg at one of the bodies, "never died. Foolishly, they still fight to liberate Nerub from the Scourge." Arthas glanced down at the dead nerubian. "Foolishly indeed," he murmured, and lifted a hand. "In death, they only serve that which they struggled against in life." And so it was that when he finally emerged into the dim light of the overhead world, gulping in the cold, clean air, his army had swollen with new recruits, freshly dead and utterly his to command. Arthas drew Invincible to a halt. He was trembling, badly, and wanted to simply sit and breathe fresh air for a few moments. The air quickly soured with the rotting stench of his own army. Anub'arak passed him, pausing to gaze at him implacably for a moment. "No time to rest, death knight. The Lich King has need of us. We must serve." Arthas shot the crypt lord a quick glance. Something in the tone of the being's voice spoke of the vaguest stirring of-was it resentment? Did Anub'arak serve only because he had to? Would he turn on the Lich King if he was able to do so-and more to the point, would he turn on Arthas? The Lich King's powers were weakening-and so were Arthas's powers right along with him. If they got weak enough... The death knight watched the retreating figure of the crypt lord, took a deep breath, and followed.
 
How long the trek through thick snow and scouring winds was, Arthas didn't know. At one point he nearly lost consciousness while riding, so weak was he. He came to with a start, terrified at the lapse, forcing himself to hang on.
He could not falter, not now. They crested a hill, and Arthas at last saw the glacier in the middle of the valley-and the army that awaited him. His spirits lifted at the sight of so many assembled to fight for him and the Lich King. Anub'arak had left many of his warriors behind, and they were there, stoic and ready. Farther down, though, closer to the glacier, he saw other figures milling about. He was too far away to distinguish them, but he knew whom they must be. His gaze traveled upward, and his breath caught. The Lich King was there, deep inside the glacier. Trapped in his prison, Arthas had seen him so in the visions. He listened with half an ear as one of the nerubians hastened up to Anub'arak and Arthas to brief them on the situation. "You've arrived just in time. Illidan's forces have taken up positions at the base of the glacier and-" Arthas cried out as the worst pain he had yet tasted buffeted him. Again, his world turned the color of blood as agony racked his body. So close to the Lich King now, the torment he shared with that great entity was magnified a hundredfold. "Arthas, my champion. You have come at last." "Master," Arthas whispered, his eyes squeezed shut and his fingers pressed in to his temples. "Yes, I have come. I am here." "There is a fracture in my prison, the Frozen Throne, and my energies are seeping from it," the Lich King continued. "That is why your powers have diminished." "But how?" Had someone attacked him? Arthas saw no immediate foes in his vision, surely he was not too late- "The runeblade, Frostmourne, was once locked inside the throne as well. I thrust it from the ice so that it would find its way to you...and then lead you to me." "And so it has," Arthas breathed. The Lich King was immobilized, trapped inside the ice. It must have been through sheer will that he had been able to force the great sword through the ice and send it to Arthas. Now he recalled the ice that had held Frostmourne-how it had looked jagged, as if it had been broken off of a larger piece. Such vast power...and all bent toward bringing Arthas to this place. Step by step, Arthas had been led here. Directed. Controlled... "You must make haste, my champion. My creator, the demon lord
Kil'jaeden, sent his agents here to destroy me. If they should reach the Frozen Throne before you, all will be lost. The Scourge will be undone. Now hurry! I will grant you all the power I can spare." Coldness suddenly began to seep through Arthas, numbing the angry, raw pain, calming his thoughts. The energy was so vast, so heady...it was more powerful even than what Arthas had known before. This, then, was why he had come. To drink deep of this icy draft, to take the cold strength of the Lich King into himself. He opened his eyes, and his vision was clear. Frostmourne's runes blazed to new life, a chill mist seeping up from it. Grinning fiercely, Arthas gripped the blade and lifted it high. When he spoke, his voice was clear and resonant and carried in the crisp, frigid air. "I saw another vision of the Lich King. He has restored my powers! I know now what I must do." He pointed with Frostmourne at the doll-sized figures in the distance. "Illidan has mocked the Scourge long enough. He is attempting to gain entry to the Lich King's throne chamber. He will fail. It's time we put the fear of death back in him. Time to end the game...once and for all." With a fierce challenging cry, he swung Frostmourne over his head. It sang out, hungry for more souls. "For the Lich King!" Arthas cried, and charged down to meet his enemies. He felt like a god as he swung Frostmourne with almost careless ease. Each soul it took only strengthened him. Let the arrows of the blood elves shower upon them like the snow. They fell like wheat before the scythe. At one point, Arthas glanced over the battlefield. Where was the one he had to slay? He saw no sign of Illidan yet. Was it possible he had already gained entrance into the- "Arthas! Arthas, turn and fight me, damn you!" The voice was clear and pure and full of hatred, and Arthas turned. The elven prince was but a few yards away, his red and gold bright as blood against the unforgiving whiteness of the snow upon which they fought. He was tall and proud, his staff planted in the snow before him, his eyes fixed on Arthas. Magic crackled around him. "You will go no farther, butcher." A muscle twitched near Arthas's eye. So Sylvanas had called him, too. He made a slight tsking sound, and grinned at the elf who had once seemed so very powerful and learned to a young human prince. His mind went back to the moment when Kael had surprised Arthas and Jaina in a kiss. The boy
that Arthas had been then had known himself outmatched by the older, much more powerful mage. Arthas was no longer a boy. "After you disappeared in so cowardly a fashion at our last confrontation, I admit, I'm surprised to see you show your face again, Kael. Don't be upset that I stole Jaina from you. You should let that go and move on. After all, there's so much left in this world for you to enjoy. Oh wait...no there isn't." "Damn you to hell, Arthas Menethil," Kael'thas snarled, trembling with outrage. "You've taken everything I ever cared for. Vengeance is all I have left." He wasted no more time in venting his anger, but instead lifted the staff. The crystal affixed to its tip glowed brightly, and a ball of fire crackled in his free hand. A heartbeat later it had soared toward Arthas. Shards of ice rained down upon the death knight. Kael'thas was a master mage, and much faster than anyone Arthas had ever encountered. He barely got Frostmourne up in time to deflect the surging fiery globe. The frost shards, however, were ease itself. He swung the great runeblade over his head, and it called to its blade the shards of ice like iron shavings to a magnet. Grinning, Arthas whirled the sword over his head, directing the pieces of ice back to their sender. He'd been taken by surprise by Kael'thas's speed, but he would not make that mistake again. "You might want to think twice about attacking me with ice, Kael," he said, laughing. He needed to goad the mage into acting rashly. Control was key to the manipulation of magic, and if Kael lost his temper, he would undoubtedly lose the fight. Kael narrowed his eyes. "Thanks for the advice," he growled. Arthas tightened up on the reins, preparing to ride down his adversary, but at that instant the snow beneath him glowed bright orange for a moment and then became water. Invincible suddenly dropped two feet and his hooves slipped on the slick ground. Arthas leaped off and sent the beast cantering away, gripping Frostmourne with renewed determination in his right hand. He extended his left. A dark ball of swirling green energy formed in his flattened palm and sped toward Kael like an arrow shot from a bow. The mage moved to counter, but the attack was too swift. His face went a shade paler and he stumbled back, his hand going to his heart. Arthas grinned as some of the mage's life energy flooded him. "I took your woman," he said, continuing to try to anger the mage,
although he knew, and probably Kael knew, that Jaina had never belonged to the elf. "I held her in my arms at night. She tasted sweet when I kissed her, Kael. She-" "Loathes you now," Kael'thas replied. "You sicken and disgust her, Arthas. Anything she felt for you has since turned to hatred." Arthas's chest contracted oddly. He realized he had not thought about how Jaina regarded him now. He had always done his best to thrust all thoughts of her away when they drifted into his mind. Was it true? Did Jaina really- An enormous crackling ball of fire exploded against his chest, and Arthas cried out as he was forced backward by the blow. Flame licked at him for precious seconds before he recovered his wits sufficiently to counter the spell. The armor had largely protected him, although its heat against his skin was agonizing, but he was aghast that he had been so taken by surprise. A second ball of fire came, but this time he was ready, meeting the fiery blast with his own deadly ice. "I destroyed your homeland...fouled your precious Sunwell. And I killed your father. Frostmourne sucked the soul right out of him, Kael. It's gone forever." "You're good at killing noble elderly men," sneered Kael'thas. The jab was unexpectedly painful. "At least you faced my father on the battlefield. What of your own, Arthas Menethil? How brave of you to cut down a defenseless parent opening his arms to embrace his-" Arthas charged, closing the distance between them in a few strides, and brought Frostmourne down. Kael'thas parried with his staff. For a second, the stave held, then it broke beneath Frostmourne's onslaught. But the delay had bought Kael sufficient time to unsheathe a glittering, gleaming weapon, a runeblade that seemed to glow red in contrast to Frostmourne's cold, icy blue. The blades clashed. Both men pressed down, straining with effort, each one's blade holding off the other as the seconds ticked by. Kael'thas grinned as their eyes met. "You recognize this blade, do you not?" Arthas did. He knew the sword's name and its lineage-Flamestrike, Felo'melorn, once wielded by Kael'thas's ancestor, Dath'Remar Sunstrider, the founder of the dynasty. The sword was almost unspeakably old. It had seen the War of the Ancients, the birth of the Highborne. Arthas returned the smirk. Flamestrike would have another significant event to bear witness to; it
would now see the end of the last Sunstrider. "Oh, I do. I saw it snap in two beneath Frostmourne, an instant before I slew your father." Arthas was physically stronger, and the energy of the Lich King surged through him. With a ragged grunt, he shoved Kael'thas backward, thinking to knock him off balance. The mage recovered quickly and almost danced into another position, brandishing Felo'melorn, his eyes never leaving Arthas. "And so I found it, and I had it reforged." "Broken swords are weak where they are mended, elf." Arthas began to circle, watching for the instant where Kael would be vulnerable. Kael'thas laughed. "Human swords, perhaps. Not elven. Not when they are reforged with magic, and hatred, and a burning need for revenge. No, Arthas. Felo'melorn is stronger than ever-as am I. As are the sin'dorei. We are the stronger for having been broken-stronger and filled with purpose. And that purpose is to see you fall!" The attack came suddenly. One moment Kael was standing, ranting, and the next Arthas was fighting for his very life. Frostmourne clanged against Flamestrike, and damned if the elf wasn't right-the blade held. Arthas darted back, feinted, and then brought Frostmourne across in a mighty sweep. Kael lunged out of its path and whirled to counterattack with a violence and intensity that surprised Arthas. He was forced back, one step, then two, and then suddenly he slipped and fell. Snarling, Kael lunged in, thinking to deal the deathblow. But Arthas remembered training with Muradin, long ago, and the dwarf's favorite trick suddenly filled his mind. He pulled his legs in tightly and kicked Kael'thas with all his strength. The mage let out a grunt and was hurtled backward into the snow. Gasping, the death knight flipped to his feet, hefted Frostmourne with both hands and plunged it down. Somehow Flamestrike was there. The blades again strained against each other. Kael'thas's eyes burned with hatred. But Arthas was the stronger in armed combat; stronger, with the stronger sword, despite Kael's gloating about how Felo'melorn was reforged. Slowly, inexorably, as Arthas knew must happen, Frostmourne descended toward Kael'thas's bare throat. "...she hates you," Kael whispered. Arthas cried out, fury blurring his vision for a moment, and shoved down with all his strength. Into the snow and frozen earth.
Kael'thas was gone. "Coward!" Arthas cried, although he knew the prince would not hear him. The bastard had again teleported away at the last second. Fury raged in him, threatening to cloud his judgment, and he pushed it aside. He'd been foolish to let Kael'thas rile him so. Curse you, Jaina. Even now, you haunt me. "Invincible, to me!" he cried, and realized his voice was shaking. Kael'thas was not dead, but he was out of the way, and that was all that mattered. He wheeled the head of his skeletal horse around, and charged again toward the fray and the throne chamber of his master. He moved through the milling crowd of enemies as if they were so many insects. As they fell, he reanimated them and sent them against their fellows. The tide of the undead was unstoppable and implacable. The snow around the base of the spire was churned up and drenched with blood. Arthas looked about him, at the last few knots of fighting going on. Blood elves-but no sign of their master. Where was Illidan? A flurry of quick motion caught his eye and he turned. He growled beneath his breath. Another dreadlord. This one's back was toward him, black wings outstretched, cloven hooves melting into the snow. Arthas lifted Frostmourne. "I've defeated your kind before, dreadlord," he snarled. "Turn and face me, if you dare, or flee into the Nether like the coward you demons are." The figure turned, slowly. Massive horns crowned its head. Its lips curved back in a smile. And over its eyes was a ragged black blindfold. Two green, glowing spots appeared where eyes should have been. "Hello, Arthas." Deep and sinister, the voice had changed, but not as much as the kaldorei's body. It was still the same pale lavender hue, etched with the same tattoos and scarifications. But the legs, the wings, the horns...Arthas immediately understood what must have happened. So that was why Illidan had become so powerful. "You look different, Illidan. I guess the Skull of Gul'dan didn't agree with you." Illidan threw back his horned head. Dark, rich laughter rumbled from him. "On the contrary, I have never felt better. In a way, I suppose I should thank you for my present state, Arthas."
"Show your appreciation by stepping out of the way, then." Arthas's voice was suddenly cold, and there was no trace of humor in it. "The Frozen Throne is mine, demon. Step aside. Leave this world and never return. If you do, I'll be waiting." "We both have our masters, boy. Mine demands the destruction of the Frozen Throne. It would seem we are at odds," Illidan replied, and lifted the weapon Arthas had fought once before. His powerful hands with their sharp black nails closed on the weapon's center and he whirled it with grace and a deceptive casualness. Arthas knew a ripple of uncertainty at the display. He had just finished a fight with Kael'thas, and while he would have been the victor had not the elf, coward that he was, teleported out at the last instant, he had been taxed by the battle. There was no hint of weariness in Illidan's bearing. Illidan's smile grew as he noticed his enemy's discomfiture. He allowed himself a moment more of uncannily masterful handling of the unusual, demonic weapon, then struck a position, settling in, preparing for combat. "It must be done!" "Your troops are either in pieces or part of my army." Arthas drew Frostmourne. Its runes glowed brightly, and mist curled up from its hilt. Behind the blindfold, Illidan's eyes-much brighter and more intensely green than he remembered-narrowed at the sight of the runeblade. If the demonically-changed kaldorei had a powerful weapon, so too did Arthas. "You'll end up one or the other." "Doubtful," Illidan sneered. "I am stronger than you know, and my master created yours! Come, pawn. I'll dispatch the servant before I dispatch your pathetic-" Arthas charged. Frostmourne glowed and hummed in his hands, as eager for Illidan's death as he was. The elf did not seem at all startled by the sudden rush, and with the utmost ease lifted his double-bladed weapon to parry. Frostmourne had broken ancient and powerful swords before, but this time, it simply clanged and grated against the glowing green metal. Illidan gave him a smirk as he held his ground. Arthas again felt unease flicker through him. Illidan was indeed changed by absorbing the power of the Skull of Gul'dan; for one thing, he was physically much stronger than he had been. Illidan chuckled, a deep and ugly sound, then shoved forcefully. It was Arthas who was forced to fall back, dropping to one knee to defend himself as the demon bore down on him.
"It is sweet to turn the tables thus," Illidan growled. "I might just kill you quickly, death knight, if you give me a good fight." Arthas didn't waste breath on insults. He gritted his teeth and concentrated on battling back the blows that were being rained upon him. The weapon was a swirl of glowing green. He could feel the power of demonic energy radiating from it, just as he knew that Illidan could sense Frostmourne's grim darkness. Suddenly Illidan was not there and Arthas lurched forward, his momentum taking him off balance. He heard a flapping sound and whirled to see Illidan overhead, his great, leathery wings creating a strong wind as he hovered out of reach. They eyed each other, Arthas catching his breath. He could see Illidan was not unaffected by the battle either. Sweat gleamed on the massive, lavender-hued torso. Arthas settled himself, Frostmourne at the ready for when Illidan would swoop in for a renewed assault. Then Illidan did something utterly unexpected. He laughed, shifted the weapon in his hands-and in a flurry of motion seemingly snapped it in two. Each powerful hand now held a single blade. "Behold the Twin Blades of Azzinoth," Illidan gloated. He flew up higher, whirling the blades in his left and right hands, and Arthas realized that he favored neither one. "Two magnificent warglaives. They can be wielded as a single devastating weapon...or, as you see, as two. It was the favored weapon of a doomguard-a powerful demon captain whom I slew. Ten thousand years ago. How long have you fought with your pretty blade, human? How well do you know it?" The words were intended to unsettle the death knight. Instead, they invigorated him. Illidan might have had this admittedly powerful weapon for longer-but Frostmourne was bound to Arthas, and he to it. It was not a sword as much as an extension of himself. He had known it when he first had the vision of it, when he had just arrived in Northrend. He had been certain of the connection when he laid eyes upon it, waiting for him. And now he felt it surge in his hand, confirming their unity. The demon blades gleamed. Illidan dropped down on Arthas like a stone. Arthas cried out and countered, more certain of this blow than of any he had dealt with the runeblade before, swinging Frostmourne up underneath the descending demon. And as he knew must happen, he felt the sword bite deep into flesh. He pulled, drawing the gash across Illidan's torso, and felt a deep
satisfaction as the former kaldorei screamed in agony. And yet the bastard would not fall. Illidan's wings beat erratically, still somehow keeping him aloft, and then before Arthas's shocked gaze his body seemed to shift and darken...almost as if it was made of writhing black, purple, and green smoke. "This is what you have given me," Illidan cried. His voice, bass to begin with, had somehow grown even deeper. Arthas felt it shiver along his bones. The demon's eyes glowed fiercely in the swirling darkness that was his face. "This gift-this power. And it will destroy you!" A scream was torn from Arthas's throat, and he fell again to his knees. Blazing green fire chased itself along his armor, seared his flesh, even dulled Frostmourne's blue glow for a moment. Over the raw cry of his own torment he heard Illidan laughing. Again the fel fire cascaded over him and Arthas fell forward, gasping. But as the fire faded and he saw Illidan swooping in for the kill, he felt the ancient runeblade he still managed to grasp urge him to rally. Frostmourne was his, and he its, and so united, they were invincible. Just as Illidan lifted his blades for the kill, Arthas raised Frostmourne, thrusting upward with all his strength. He felt the blade connect, pierce flesh, strike deep. Illidan fell hard to the ground. Blood gushed from his bare torso, melting the snow around it with a slow hissing sound. His chest rose and fell in gasps. His vaunted twin blades were of no use now. One had been knocked from his grasp, the other lay in a hand that could not even curl around its hilt. Arthas got to his feet, his body still tingling with the remnants of the fel fire Illidan had hurled at him. He stared at him for a long moment, branding the sight into his mind. He thought about dealing the killing blow, but decided to let the merciless cold of the place do it for him. A greater need burned in him now, and he turned, lifting his eyes to the spire that towered above him. He swallowed hard and simply stood for a moment, knowing, without knowing how he knew it, that something was about to fundamentally change. Then he took a deep breath and entered the cavern. Arthas moved almost as if in a daze, down the lengths of twining tunnels that led ever deeper into the bowels of the earth. His feet seemed guided, and while there was no noise, certainly no one to challenge his right to be here, he felt, rather than heard, a deep thrum of power. He continued to descend, feeling that call of power drawing him ever closer to his destiny.
Up ahead was a cold, blue-white light. Arthas moved toward it, almost breaking into a run, and the tunnel opened up into what Arthas could only think of as a throne chamber. For just ahead was a structure that made Arthas's breath catch in his throat. The Lich King's prison sat atop of this twining tower, this spire of bluegreen, shimmering ice-that-was-not-ice that rose up as if to pierce the very roof of the cavern. A narrow walkway wound, serpentine, about the spire, leading him upward. Still filled with the energy granted to him by the Lich King, Arthas did not tire, but unwelcome memories seemed to dart at him like flies as he ascended, putting one booted foot in front of the other. Words, phrases, images came back to him. "Remember, Arthas. We are paladins. Vengeance cannot be a part of what we must do. If we allow our passions to turn to bloodlust, then we will become as vile as the orcs." Jaina...oh, Jaina..."No one can seem to deny you anything, least of all me." "Don't deny me, Jaina. Don't ever deny me. Please." "I never would, Arthas. Never." He kept going, relentlessly moving upward. "We know so little-we can't just slaughter them like animals out of our own fear!" "This is bad business, lad. Leave it be. Let it stay here, lost and forgotten.... We'll find another way tae save yer people. Let's leave now, go back, and find that way." One foot followed the other. Upward, ever upward. An image of black wings brushed his memory. "I will leave you one final prediction. Just remember, the harder you strive to slay your enemies, the faster you'll deliver your people into their hands." Even as these memories tugged at him, clutched at his heart, there was one image, one voice, that was stronger and more compelling than all the others, whispering, encouraging him: "Closer you draw, my champion. My moment of freedom comes...and with it, your ascension to true power." Upward he climbed, his gaze ever on the peak. On the huge chunk of deep blue ice that imprisoned the one who had first set Arthas's feet on this path. Closer it drew, until Arthas came to a halt a few feet away. For a long moment, he regarded the figure trapped within, imperfectly glimpsed. Mist
rolled off the huge chunk of ice, further obscuring the image. Frostmourne glowed in his hand. From deep inside, Arthas saw the barest hint of an answering flare of two points of glowing blue light. "RETURN THE BLADE," came the deep, rasping voice in Arthas's mind, almost unbearably loud. "COMPLETE THE CIRCLE. RELEASE ME FROM THIS PRISON!" Arthas took a step forward, then another, lifting Frostmourne as he moved until he was running. This was the moment it had all been leading to, and without realizing it, a roar built in his throat and tore free as he swung the blade down with all of his strength. A massive cracking resounded through the chamber as Frostmourne slammed down. The ice shattered, huge chunks flying in every direction. Arthas lifted his arms to shield himself, but the shards flew past him harmlessly. Pieces fell from the imprisoned body, and the Lich King cried out, lifting his armored arms to the sky. More groaning, cracking sounds came from the cavern and from the being himself, so loud that Arthas winced and covered his ears. It was as if the very world was tearing itself apart. Suddenly the armored figure that was the Lich King seemed to shatter as his prison did, falling apart before Arthas's stunned gaze. There was nothing-no one-inside. Only the armor, icy black, clattering to lie in pieces. The helm, empty of its owner's head, slid to a halt to lie at Arthas's feet. He stared down at it for a long moment, a deep shiver passing through him. All this time...he had been chasing a ghost. Had the Lich King ever really been here? If not-who had thrust Frostmourne from the ice? Who had demanded to be freed? Was he, Arthas Menethil, supposed to have been the one encased in the Frozen Throne all along? Had this ghost he'd been chasing...been himself? Questions that would likely never have answers. But one thing was clear to him. As Frostmourne had been for him, so was the armor. Gauntleted fingers closed over the spiked helm and he lifted it slowly, reverently, and then, closing his eyes, he lowered it onto his white head. He was suddenly galvanized, his body tensing as he felt the essence of the Lich King enter him. It pierced his heart, stopped his breath, shivered along his veins, icy, powerful, crashing through him like a tidal wave. His eyes were closed, but he saw, he saw so much-all that Ner'zhul, the orc shaman, had known, all he had seen, had done. For a moment, Arthas feared
he would be overwhelmed by it all, that in the end, the Lich King had tricked him into coming here so that he could place his essence in a fresh new body. He braced himself for a battle for control, with his body as the prize. But there was no struggle. Only a blending, a melding. All around him, the cavern continued to collapse. Arthas was only barely aware of it. His eyes darted rapidly back and forth beneath his closed lids. His lips moved. He spoke. They...spoke. "Now...we are one."
EPILOGUE: THE LICH KING
The blue and white world blurred in Arthas's dream vision. The cold, pure colors shifted, changed to the warm hues of wood and fire-and torchlight. He had done as he said he would; he had remembered his life, all that had gone before, had again walked the path that had taken him to the seat of the Frozen Throne and this deep, deep dreaming state. But the dream was not over, it would seem. He again sat at the head of the long, beautifully carved table that took up most of this illusionary Great Hall. And the two who had such an interest in his dream were still there, watching him. The orc on his left, elderly but still powerful, searched his face, and then began to smile, the gesture stretching the image of the white skull painted on his face. And on his right, the boy-the emaciated, sickly boy-looked even worse than Arthas remembered him looking when he had entered the dream of remembrance. The boy licked cracked, pale lips and drew breath as if to speak, but it was the orc whose words shattered the stillness first. "There is so much more," he promised. Images crowded Arthas's mind, interweaving and lying atop one another into glimpses of the future and past entangled. An army of humans on horseback, carrying the flag of Stormwind...fighting alongside, not against, a Horde raiding party mounted atop snarling wolves. They were allies, attacking the Scourge together. The scene shifted, changed. Now the humans and orcs were attacking one another-and the undead, some crying out orders and fighting with minds that were clearly their own-were standing shoulder to shoulder with the orcs, strange-looking bull-men, and trolls. Quel'Thalas-undamaged? No, no, there was the scar he and his army had left-but the city was being rebuilt.... Faster now the images poured into his mind, dizzying, chaotic, disordered. It was impossible to tell the past from the future now. Another
image, that of skeletal dragons raining destruction down on a city Arthas had never seen before-a hot, dry place crowded with orcs. And-yes, yes it was Stormwind itself that was now coming under attack from the undead dragons - Nerubians-no, no, not nerubians, not Anub'arak's people, but kin to them, yes. A desert race, these were. Their servants were mammoth creatures with the heads of dogs, golems made of obsidian, who strode across the shining yellow stands. A symbol appeared, one Arthas knew-the L of Lordaeron, impaled by a sword, but depicted in red, not blue. The symbol changed, became a red flame on a white background. The flame seemed to spark to a life of its own and engulfed the background, burning it away to reveal the silvery waters of a vast expanse of water...a sea... ...Something was roiling just beneath the ocean's surface. The hithertosmooth surface began to churn wildly, seething, as if from a storm, although the day was clear. A horrible sound that Arthas only dimly recognized as laughter assaulted his ears, along with the screaming of a world wrenched from its proper place, hauled upward to face the light of day it had not seen in uncounted centuries.... Green-all was green, shadowy and nightmarish, grotesque images dancing at the corner of Arthas's mind only to dart away before they could be firmly grasped. There was a brief glimpse, gone now-antlers? A deer? A man? It was hard to tell. Hope hung about the figure, but there were forces bent on destroying it.... The mountains themselves came to life, taking giant strides, crushing everything luckless enough to cross their paths. With each mammoth footfall, the world seemed to tremble and shake. Frostmourne. This at least he knew, and intimately. The sword whirled end over end, as if Arthas has tossed it into the air. A second sword rose to meet it-long, inelegant but powerful, with the symbol of a skull embedded in its fearsome blade. A name-"Ashbringer," a sword and yet more than a sword, as was Frostmourne. The two clashed- Arthas blinked and shook his head. The visions, tumbled, chaotic, heartening, and disturbing-were gone. The orc chuckled, the painted skull on his face stretching with the gesture. He had once been named Ner'zhul, had once had the gift of true visioning. Arthas did not doubt that all he had seen, though imperfectly
understood, would indeed come to pass. "So much more," the orc repeated, "but only if you continue to walk this path fully." Slowly, the death knight turned his white head to the boy. The ill child met him with a gaze that was astonishingly clear, and for a moment, Arthas felt something inside him stir. Despite everything-the boy would not die. And that meant... The boy smiled a little, and some of the sickness dissipated as Arthas struggled for words. "You...are me. You are both...me. But you..." His voice was soft, tinged with wonder and disbelief. "You are the little flame that burns inside me still, that resists the ice. You are the last vestiges of humanity-of compassion, of my ability to love, to grieve...to care. You are my love for Jaina, my love for my father...for all the things that made me what I once was. Somehow Frostmourne didn't take it all. I tried to turn away from you...and I couldn't. I-can't." The boy's sea-green eyes brightened and he gave his other self a tremulous smile. His color improved, and before Arthas's eyes, some of the pustules on his skin disappeared. "You understand, now. Despite all, Arthas, you have not abandoned me." Tears of hope stood in those eyes and his voice, though stronger now than it had been, quavered with emotion. "There must be a reason. Arthas Menethil...much harm have you done, but there is goodness in you yet. If there was none...I would not exist, not even in your dreams." He slipped off the chair and slowly walked toward the death knight. Arthas stood as he approached. For a moment, they regarded each other, the child and the man he had become. The boy extended his arms, as if he were a living, breathing child asking to be picked up and held by a loving father. "It doesn't have to be too late," he said quietly. "No," Arthas said quietly, staring raptly at the boy. "It doesn't." He touched the curve of the boy's cheek, slipped a hand beneath the small chin and tilted up the shining face. He smiled into his own eyes. "But it is." Frostmourne descended. The boy cried out, his shocked, betrayed, anguished cry-that of the wind raging outside-and for a moment Arthas saw him standing there, the blade buried in his chest almost as big as he was, and felt one final tremor of remorse as he met his own eyes.
Then the boy was gone. All that remained of him was the bitter keening of the wind scouring the tormented land. It felt...marvelous. It was only with the boy's passing that Arthas truly realized how dreadful a burden this last struggling scrap of humanity had been. He felt light, powerful, purged. Scoured clean, as Azeroth would soon be. All his weakness, his softness, everything that had ever made him hesitate or second-guess himself-it was all gone, now. There was only Arthas, Frostmourne, all but singing at having claimed the final piece of Arthas's soul, and the orc, whose skull-face was split with triumphant laughter. "Yes!" the orc exhilarated, laughing almost maniacally. "I knew you would make this choice. For so long you have wrestled with the last dregs of goodness, of humanity in you, but no longer. The boy held you back, and now you are free." He now got to his feet, his body still that of an old orc, but moving with the ease and fluidity of the young. "We are one, Arthas. Together, we are the Lich King. No more Ner'zhul, no more Arthas-only this one glorious being. With my knowledge, we can -" His eyes bulged as the sword impaled him. Arthas stepped forward, plunging the glittering, hungering Frostmourne ever deeper into the dream-being that had once been Ner'zhul, then the Lich King, and was soon to be nothing, nothing at all. He slipped his other arm around the body, pressing his lips so close to the green ear that the gesture was almost intimate, as intimate as the act of taking a life always was and always would be. "No," Arthas whispered. "No we. No one tells me what to do. I've got everything I need from you-now the power is mine and mine alone. Now there is only I. I am the Lich King. And I am ready." The orc shuddered in his arms, stunned by the betrayal, and vanished.
 
The teacup shattered as it fell from Jaina's suddenly nerveless hands. She gasped, momentarily unable to breathe, the cold of the damp, gray day knifing through her. Aegwynn was there, her gnarled hands closing on Jaina's. "Aegwynn-I-what happened?" Her voice was thick, anguished, and tears suddenly filled her eyes as if she was grieving terribly for the loss
of...something.... "It's not your imagination," Aegwynn said grimly. "I felt it, too. As for what-well, I'm sure we'll find out."
 
Sylvanas started as if the mammoth demon in front of her had struck her. Which, of course, he would never dare do. Varimathras narrowed his glowing eyes. "My lady? What is it?" Him. It was always him. Sylvanas's gloved hands clenched and unclenched. "Something has happened. Something to do with the Lich King. I-felt it." There was no longer a link between them, at least not one in which she was under his control. But perhaps something lingered. Something that warned her. "We need to step up our plans," she told Varimathras. "I believe that time has suddenly become a precious commodity."
 
For so long, he had felt nothing. He had stayed on the throne, immobile, waiting, dreaming. The ice had come to cover him as he sat still as stone, but not a prison, no, a second skin. He had not known then what he was waiting for, but now he did. He had taken the final steps on a journey begun so long ago, begun the day that darkness had first brushed his world in the form of a weeping, young Stormwind prince mourning his father. The path had led across Azeroth, to Northrend, to this Frozen Throne and open sky. To the searching of his deepest self, and the choices to murder both the innocent that held him back and the parts of himself that had shaped him. Arthas, the Lich King, alone in his glory and power, slowly opened his eyes. Ice cracked from them at the gesture and fell in small shards, like frozen tears. A smile formed beneath the ornate helm that covered his white hair and pale skin, and more ice fell from his awakening, slowly shifting form, fragments of an icy chrysalis that was no longer needed. He was awake. "It's begun."


While hunting demons by himself, Sargeras discovered the void lords' plans to corrupt a slumbering world-soul. Doubt flooded his spirit. Had the void lords already succeeded? Even if they had not, Sargeras knew that stopping them was impossible. The titans could not keep watch over the entire universe all at once. As Sargeras pondered how to stop the void lords, he came to a troubling conclusion. Existence itself was flawed. The only way to spare the universe from the void lords was by burning away all creation. It was drastic, yes, but necessary. Though it pained Sargeras to imagine it, even a dead universe was preferable to one controlled by the powers of the Void. His only solace was the knowledge that since life had arisen in the cosmos once before, it could do so again. Sargeras brought his findings to Aggramar and the rest of the titan Pantheon, and he proposed his drastic solution. It was not received well. The other titans admonished Sargeras for considering such a plan. Even Aggramar, his closest friend, stood against him, believing it was the Pantheon's duty to safeguard life and maintain order in the universe. In that moment, Sargeras lost all faith in the Pantheon. The other titans lacked the willpower to do what needed to be done, and he would waste no more time weathering their criticisms. The titan champion abandoned his allies and disappeared into the Great Dark. The Pantheon was saddened by Sargeras's departure, but that did not stop its members from their great search. They continued exploring the distant reaches of creation, seeking out slumbering titan spirits. Meanwhile, Aggramar took on the burden of fighting demons alone. It was harrowing work, and he longed for the days of fighting shoulder-to-shoulder with Sargeras. Aggramar's hope was that one day his old friend would come to his senses and return to the fold. Such a reunion would never come to pass. Sargeras had made his decision. He would cleanse the universe in fire to thwart the void lords' plans. And he would not stop this quest-this Burning Crusade-until every star had gone
dark and he stood over a universe of embers. Despite Sargeras's vast power, he could not prosecute his Burning Crusade alone. He needed loyal servants, ones that would embrace their role as agents of destruction. He needed the very things he had once sworn to destroy. He needed demons. Sargeras rallied the wicked creatures to his side, and he indulged in the terrible might of fel magic. The destructive energy enveloped his soul and scarred his noble form forever, but it also granted Sargeras power beyond anything he had ever known. The corrupted titan gave some of this newfound power to his demonic acolytes, uniting them as one in the emerald fires of fel magic. He named his growing army the Burning Legion, and he unleashed it upon the unsuspecting universe. In time, the Legion's ranks would swell with new types of demons. World after world would fall to their relentless onslaught. Some mortal civilizations would willingly join the Legion to escape oblivion. Others would be forcibly corrupted. And still others would be erased from existence forever.
Before the Burning Legion launched its crusade, a small world took shape in a distant corner of the Great Dark. This world would be known by many names in the coming ages. The mighty ogres would call it Dawgar, meaning "the Known Earth" in their brutish tongue. An intelligent avian race known as the arakkoa would later name it Rakshar, "the Sunstone." In modern times, the most common name for this world would be Draenor. Draenor did not contain a slumbering world-soul, but it was remarkable in other ways. Nearly all worlds in existence were home to elemental spirits of fire, air, earth, and water. Sometimes, these primordial beings were highly destructive. They took on physical forms and waged war against each other, keeping their respective worlds in a state of constant upheaval. Such was not the case on Draenor. An abundance of the fifth element-the Spirit of Life-had saturated the world. This force had a natural calming effect on the elemental spirits. It tempered their violent nature, and it even prevented them from taking on physical forms. The fifth element had another, far more extraordinary effect on Draenor. It accelerated the growth of flora and fauna. It made the world into a cradle of vibrant, untamed life. Creatures of every shape and size roamed the young world, vying for dominance. The strong preyed on the weak. The cunning preyed on the strong. Savagery became critical to survival. Draenor's greatest predators did not hunt with fang or claw. They hunted with root and thorn. A carnivorous, invasive strain of plant had sprouted on Draenor. These life-forms were known as Sporemounds. Their tendril-like vines slithered over the earth and strangled every primitive beast that they could reach. As they grew, the Sporemounds consumed more and more and more. Their hunger and need to expand knew no end. They blossomed into living
mountains of tangled brambles and noxious pods. Wherever the Sporemounds' tendrils crept over the earth, lush forests and swampy mires took root. Before long, a labyrinth of deep wilds stretched to the far corners of the world. Not even Draenor's elemental energies were safe from the Sporemounds. Their roots wormed deep underground in search of water. As they did, the invading plant life tapped into the fifth element that suffused Draenor's stones and soil. Consuming this primordial energy ignited a crude communal sentience within the Sporemounds and the surrounding wilds. This newfound intelligence allowed Draenor's plants to act as a single massive organism. The Sporemounds and all other vegetation became known collectively as the Evergrowth. If any major threat arose, the Evergrowth could react in unison. Yet such threats were nonexistent. The Evergrowth dominated everything in sight, and nothing could hold it at bay.
While the Sporemounds flourished, Aggramar continued his hunt for demons. His grand mission eventually took him near Draenor, a world not yet discovered by the titans. Aggramar lingered among the vast emptiness over Draenor, listening for the dreams of a world-soul at its core. He heard none. And yet the world still intrigued him. He had never seen a place of such voracious and diverse plant life, a place of such untamed savagery. The more Aggramar observed the Evergrowth, the more he foresaw doom in Draenor's future. If left unchecked, the plant life would consume everything on the world, even the elemental spirits. Once that happened, the Evergrowth would devour itself. Draenor would be left a dust-blown wasteland, devoid of even the most primitive life. Though Aggramar was eager to continue his war against demons, he could not leave Draenor to such a fate. His natural affinity for order compelled him to take action. The titan warrior did not want to exterminate Draenor's plant life; he desired only to temper it. He knew that to do so, he would need to neutralize the Sporemounds. They were the heart of the Evergrowth's power and the cause of its rampant expansion. Aggramar considered destroying the Sporemounds himself, but his power was so great that he feared he would irreparably damage or even shatter Draenor. He also knew he could not stand guard over the world forever. Instead, he would create a mighty servant in his image to uproot the Sporemounds and then maintain balance over Draenor. Aggramar swept his colossal hand over the world and wove its fire, air, earth, and water energies into a massive elemental storm. He channeled the roaring tempest into Draenor's largest mountain. The energies blasted through the crust and sent shockwaves of force around the globe. Then the mountain itself groaned to life and stood up on two colossal legs. Raw elemental power crackled over a craggy hide crisscrossed by veins of molten stone.
Aggramar named his creation Grond. He would serve as the titan warrior's hand on Draenor. At Aggramar's command, Grond set out to divide and conquer the Evergrowth. The walking mountain lumbered over the world, lakes of elemental fire trailing in his footsteps. Grond dredged out seas, carved valleys, and forged mountains to separate the Evergrowth. Then he marched toward the nearest Sporemound, which towered nearly as high as the giant. The Sporemound's gnarled roots exploded from the earth to entangle Grond and bar his way. The giant smashed through them with ease. Grond stabbed his jagged fingers into the Sporemound, and then he tore it from the world's surface with a single mighty heave. The other Sporemounds shivered in agony at the destruction of their kin. Mere roots and vines would not topple Grond. The Sporemounds needed a new weapon. They needed to adapt. Each Sporemound drained the surrounding forests and jungles of life essence, leaving behind only withered tracts of land. Infused with these energies, the Sporemounds arose to walk the world. There were three Sporemounds in total, and each embodied a different region of the Evergrowth's domain. The first was called Zang. Swampy mires and mushroom thickets glistened across its hide. The second, Botaan, was covered with primal forestlands. The last of the Sporemounds was known as Naanu, and it wore a fleece of dense jungles. As one the Sporemounds moved against Grond, and Draenor buckled under the weight of warring giants.
From the skies over Draenor, Aggramar watched the Sporemounds converge on Grond. Zang, Botaan, and Naanu were determined to preserve the Evergrowth at any cost. They called upon their primal fury, and they lashed Grond with tendrils hard enough to crack diamond. Massive boulders crumbled away from the elemental giant's skin. The stones crashed to the ground with enough force to carve out valleys and shatter mountaintops. Through their communal sentience, the Sporemounds moved in perfect unison. They nearly overwhelmed Grond, and he teetered on the verge of collapse. But it was only for a moment. Like Aggramar, Grond possessed a will that was forged of steel. He would not give up until he had brought balance to Draenor. Elemental storms howled to life over Grond's body as he gathered his strength and launched himself at the Sporemounds. He pummeled them with fists that carried the weight of mountains. Each blow sheared away pieces of the verdant giants. Broken roots and seeds tumbled from the Sporemounds and fell to the earth. Grond was relentless, but the Sporemounds gave no ground. They endured the elemental giant's wrath and continued their fight for dominion over the world. The tide of battle shifted between each side, and the world's crust trembled and cracked beneath their feet. Though the Sporemounds were resilient, they could not hold out forever against Grond's attacks. Zang suffered the most from the elemental giant. It was the smallest of the Sporemounds and the first to fall before Grond's onslaught. Grond took hold of Zang and tore the monstrous creature in half. The Sporemound's shredded corpse toppled to the world's surface with a deafening thunderclap. In the ages to come, the rotting body would transform into a fungal region known as the Zangar Sea. Grond pressed his attack against Naanu and crushed the other giant
between his unyielding hands. The lifeless Sporemound collapsed to the ground. Its broken husk would slowly sink into the earth and become a region called Tanaan Jungle. Two Sporemounds had fallen to Grond, but the long battles had chipped away at his mighty form. He was a shadow of his former self, riddled with cracks and fissures. Botaan sensed its enemy's weakened state, but it needed power to defeat Grond. The Sporemound leeched the dwindling life essence from the bodies of Naanu and Zang, drawing the energies into itself and growing to a monstrous size.
GROND BATTLES THE FINAL SPOREMOUND Even with its new strength, Botaan was cautious. It evaded Grond's direct assaults, all the while entangling its foe in thousands of small vines. The thorny tendrils coiled around Grond and gradually burrowed into the cracks and wounds on his skin. Grond considered the vines nothing more than a nuisance, and he ignored them. Yet as the tendrils tunneled deeper and deeper, he realized the true threat they posed. By then, it was too late. The vines wrenched open Grond's existing wounds and caused new fissures to erupt across his body. The elemental giant collapsed beneath his own weight and crumbled to pieces. The bulk of his corpse formed a
mountain range at the edge of a region later known as Nagrand.
During the battles between Grond and the Sporemounds, pieces of the leviathans had fallen to the earth and given rise to new types of creatures. The seeds and roots that had tumbled from Zang, Naanu, and Botaan contained a small portion of their life essence. Many unique beings sprouted from this plant matter. The strongest were lumbering giants called the genesaur. A mane of thick fronds covered the skin of these four-legged beings. Despite their enormous size, they were incredibly swift and agile. Much like the plant matter that fell from the Sporemounds, the rocks that toppled from Grond stirred with life essence. The largest boulders arose as sentient beings called the colossals. Though they were not as mighty as Grond, their shadows still loomed large over the land. Much of the stony debris that fell from Grond also contained the primordial elements of fire, air, earth, and water. These energies gradually coalesced into pools of power, from which elemental spirits took physical shape for the first time in Draenor's history. If not for the Sporemounds, this would not have been possible. They had devoured much of the fifth element, which allowed the elemental spirits to grow in power. These spirits were initially few in number. But after Grond's defeat, their population exploded. Vast quantities of elemental power had bled from his corpse. As a result, countless physical elementals emerged around Grond's mountainous remains. Among them were the Furies. They were the most powerful elemental spirits on Draenor, and they dwelled near what remained of Grond's head. Their names were Incineratus, the Fury of Fire; Aborius, the Fury of Water; Gordawg, the Fury of Earth; and Kalandrios, the Fury of Air. The four Furies lamented the death of Grond, and they vowed to dwell in his corpse's shadow forever. The place that these beings called home would be known by Draenor's future mortal cultures as the Throne of the Elements.

When the colossals emerged on Draenor, hope swelled in Aggramar. Though the creatures were not as mighty as Grond, they were many. Aggramar was confident that they could destroy Botaan and bring balance to Draenor, but they would need his help. Aggramar fashioned immense stone discs from Grond's remains and branded them with titan runes of power. He fused these objects onto the colossals' craggy hides like plates of armor. The discs flooded the giants with primordial energy, enhancing their strength and resilience. The colossals' empowerment had not come a moment too soon. With nothing to oppose them, Botaan and the genesaur had free rein over Draenor. The Sporemound and its followers were cultivating the Evergrowth and reclaiming territories destroyed by Grond. Before Botaan could fully restore the Evergrowth, Aggramar unleashed the colossals. He had learned much about the Sporemound while watching it battle Grond. He knew its strengths and its weaknesses, and he imparted this knowledge to the colossals. Just as the colossals began their march, Aggramar sensed a faint ripple of energy cascading through the Great Dark Beyond. Its source was unmistakable: it was the death rattle of a constellar. These celestial beings kept watch over the titans' ordered worlds. For one of them to have perished was a dire omen. Something had vanquished the constellar. Though his work on Draenor was far from over, Aggramar could not stay. He needed to find out what had killed the constellar and whether the nearby world was in danger. Aggramar charged the colossals with defeating the Evergrowth in his absence. He bade them farewell, vowing he would return one day. Then he launched himself into the stars. He would never see Draenor again.
The colossals would never know of Aggramar's fate. They fully expected their titan master to return. The giants were determined to bring balance to Draenor before that happened, but the task ahead was immense. The Evergrowth had enveloped much of the world. As the wilds had flourished, so had Botaan's strength. The monstrous Sporemound now eclipsed Grond in size. It stalked through the dense jungles at the Evergrowth's heart, surrounded by hundreds of fierce genesaur. Using the knowledge shared with them by Aggramar, the colossals debated how to defeat the Sporemound. Launching an attack into the Evergrowth, where Botaan was at its most powerful, would be suicide. The colossals needed to draw the Sporemound and its followers away from the wilds if they were to have any chance of succeeding. The colossals gathered at the Evergrowth's borders and hacked away at the forests. Just as they had hoped, the giants drew Botaan's ire. The Sporemound rallied its genesaur and stormed toward the meddlesome colossals. As Botaan's shadow loomed closer, the stone giants retreated into the barren ravines and hills beyond the Evergrowth, where they could use the terrain to their advantage.
THE FATE OF AGGRAMAR After leaving Draenor, Aggramar discovered that the constellar had fallen to the Burning Legion. He hunted down this vast demonic army, only to find that it was led by his beloved mentor, Sargeras. Aggramar demanded an
explanation from the corrupted titan, but he received none. Sargeras would not abandon his Burning Crusade to extinguish all life in the cosmos. Not for Aggramar. Not for anyone. The mentor and his protégé came to blows. Aggramar was no match for Sargeras's fel power. He retreated from the battle and gathered the rest of the Pantheon to stop their fallen brother. Despite his earlier confrontation with Sargeras, Aggramar clung to the stubborn belief that he could bring his friend back to the side of good. He tried to reason with Sargeras one last time. He tried to awaken whatever nobility still remained in his mentor's soul. In response, Sargeras annihilated Aggramar. The stunned members of the Pantheon made war on Sargeras and his Legion. Their apocalyptic battle warped reality and darkened the stars. In the end, Sargeras prevailed. He engulfed his kin in a storm of fel fire and shattered their physical forms. Only the titans' disembodied spirits survived the attack. Though they escaped Sargeras's wrath, they would never be the same again. The Burning Legion was victorious.
Botaan followed without hesitation, seeing the colossals as little more than pale imitations of Grond. When the Sporemound strayed beyond the Evergrowth's borders, the colossals attacked. Many of the stone giants had lain in wait amid the rocky landscape to mask their numbers. Now they emerged from hiding, and the full might of the colossals smashed into Botaan and its genesaur. The war that followed would rattle Draenor for thousands of years. Control of the world constantly ebbed and flowed between the colossals and the Evergrowth's agents.
Over time, these battles took their toll on the colossals. Many succumbed to Botaan and the genesaur, and their broken bodies littered the ground. Just as the stone giants had risen from pieces of Grond, new creatures called the magnaron emerged from the colossals' remains. The magnaron were not as large or as intelligent as the colossals, but they commanded great power. Veins of fire and raw elemental energies coursed over their jagged skin. The colossals called on the magnaron to fight the Evergrowth, but they did not obey. By their nature, the molten giants opposed the Evergrowth, but they felt no loyalty toward their progenitors. Some of the magnaron battled genesaur they crossed paths with, but most of the others wandered into the barren tracts of Draenor to seek out areas of volcanic activity. With their numbers dwindling, the colossals could do little to stop Botaan from spreading the Evergrowth. Unless the stone giants took drastic action, they were doomed to fail. Most of the colossals gathered to make a final stand. Their hides were worn and cracked by millennia of fighting, but the titan relics fused to their skin still contained immense power. With this power, they would sacrifice themselves to bring balance to the world. The colossals forged into the Evergrowth and swarmed Botaan. They dug their rocky hands into the Sporemound and clung tight to its giant form. In unison, the colossals unleashed the energy stored within their titan relics, channeling it through themselves and into Botaan. A massive explosion ripped through the Sporemound and the colossals. The blast was so immense that it shattered their bodies and hurled the pieces across Draenor. Botaan's death rattle blazed through every root and leaf in the world. Lush tracts of forest withered, and hundreds of genesaur dropped dead where they stood. For one brief moment, the entirety of the Evergrowth trembled with the shared agony of Botaan's annihilation. Then there was silence. No thoughts or emotions passed among the world's plant life. Botaan's demise had destroyed the communal sentience that connected Draenor's wilds. The colossals had triumphed, but they had paid a terrible price. No
creatures would ever arise from their remains. Drawing on the power of their titan relics had burned away all life essence from the colossals and seared their corpses. Over time, their broken bodies would sink into the earth and become veins of a nearly indestructible metal called blackrock ore. Unlike the fallen colossals, Botaan's body still contained potent life energies. Wherever fragments of the Sporemound fell to the earth, forests and jungles bloomed. The bulk of Botaan's corpse formed a vibrant region that would later be known as Farahlon. Genesaur and other plant-creatures would continue to thrive in these havens of life, but they would not have a Sporemound to unite them in purpose and guide their collective will. The Evergrowth was no more, but that did not mean peace for Draenor.
For many ages after the end of the Evergrowth, the descendants of the colossals and the Sporemounds vied for dominance over the world. Magnaron and genesaur were not the sole inheritors of this conflict. New creatures of stone and root emerged to join the war. When Botaan had exploded, its body had released countless spores teeming with the Spirit of Life. These spores drifted back to the world's surface and warped whatever they touched. They clung to the hides of magnaron and weakened their bodies. Some of the magnaron devolved into half-flesh, half-stone giants called gronn. These massive predators stalked the edges of the wilds, terrorizing lesser life-forms and devouring anything they could find. The gronn were only moderately intelligent, but they proved to be exceptional hunters. The jagged spikes that protruded from their skin served as weapons to kill their prey, and rocky plates functioned as armor to protect them from other dangerous creatures. Due to the lingering effects of the spores, a small number of gronn continued degenerating into the one-eyed ogron. They were more intelligent than gronn, but they were not as strong. The ogron feared the gronn, and they viewed the hulking beasts as gods. Just as some gronn had evolved, so, too, would a number of ogron. Over thousands of years, the residual spores would transform them into fleshy creatures called ogres. These brutes were smaller than their progenitors, and many of them would become slaves to the ogron. From the ogres would arise yet another race-a people called the orcs. They were the smallest of Grond's line. Yet what they lacked in size and strength, they made up for with a fierce intellect and a sense of community. By banding together, they survived the harsh wilds. The first few generations of stone-born creatures-the magnaron, the
gronn, and the ogron-were known collectively as the breakers. They laid claim to the world's barren mountains and rocky chasms. Though the breakers were different in many ways, they had all descended from Grond. Their common ancestry did not make them allies, but it did infuse them with a shadow of the ancient giant's influence. No matter how diverse their individual customs or ways of life were, all of the breakers were opposed to the verdant wilds. The breakers met fierce resistance from the genesaur and other plant-based life. These creatures were known collectively as the primals, and they traced their lineage back to the Sporemounds. Like the breakers, many of the primals arose in the aftermath of Botaan's destruction. The numerous spores released from the giant's corpse settled in the wilds. While these spores weakened the creatures of stone, they had the opposite effect on plant life. The spores gave sentience to existing forms of plants. The jungles stirred as new beings took shape and walked the land. Some were small and simpleminded creatures called podlings and sporelings. The most intelligent and prolific new race was called the botani. The bark-skinned botani spread through Draenor's wilderness. Faint memories of the Evergrowth lingered in their minds, but they did not know the full truth of the Sporemounds or their battles with Grond and the colossals. Even so, what little the botani knew of the Evergrowth still had a profound impact on their culture. They revered the genesaur as gods, seeing them as echoes of the great Sporemounds. The botani also rejected the idea of self, believing that their individual souls were part of a collective spirit that interlinked all plant life on Draenor. Along with the genesaur and other plant-creatures, the botani devoted themselves to protecting the forestlands. As they did so, they inevitably clashed with the breakers.
REMNANTS OF THE COLOSSALS Legends say that a small handful of colossals survived the battle with Botaan. They, too, were affected by the spores that spread throughout the world. As the millennia passed, their bodies diminished and became fleshy. When mortal civilizations later came to power on Draenor, these colossals were long dead. Creatures such as the orcs would discover their bones and use them to fashion weapons, dwellings, and trinkets. They believed that the giants' remains contained power.
For many long ages, sporadic battles erupted between these two factions, but neither side could ever destroy the other. Their endless conflict slowly carved out the borders of the world and brought balance to Draenor. Over time, the breakers asserted complete control over lands such as Gorgrond, Frostfire Ridge, Nagrand, and Arak, while the primals cultivated the wilds of Tanaan Jungle, Zangar Sea, Farahlon, Shadowmoon Valley, and Talador.
The Spirit of Life that had saturated primordial Draenor had birthed many kinds of animals. Nearly all of these beasts had been consumed by the Evergrowth and the Sporemounds. With the end of the Evergrowth, animal life had a chance to take hold in the world again. The scattered remains of Botaan had become forests teeming with the Spirit of Life. These energies transformed the land and accelerated the development of new species. The first beasts to arise were enormous creatures that wielded extraordinary power over the land. Some of them had an affinity to the nature magics that the botani and other primals had mastered; others tapped into Draenor's elemental energies. Still others reached beyond the veil of reality, touching the forces of Light and Void that permeated the cosmos. Despite their considerable powers, Draenor's giant animals faced a daunting struggle for survival. The botani ensnared them for use as food to nourish the wilds, or to infest them with fungi that transformed them into the primals' minions. Elsewhere, the gronn and ogron hunted the beasts like game. The animals most suited to thrive on this unforgiving world were winged species that could soar above the reach of the primals and the breakers. Most of Draenor's avian races developed in Arak. A massive stone spire towered over the region's dense woods and coastal scrublands. There, three godlike creatures took form: the majestic fire bird Rukhmar, the vicious wind serpent Sethe, and the cunning raven Anzu. These animals were each powerful in their own right. Rukhmar's spirit was touched by the primordial force of Light. Her connection to this energy allowed her to summon enchanted flames that could either destroy life or nourish it. White-hot fire constantly rippled over her reddish-orange wings without ever singeing her. Sethe's wings were short and leathery, and he could not fly as high as Rukhmar. He had an affinity to the shadow energies-the Void-that existed in the universe.
Anzu was much smaller than Rukhmar and Sethe. What he lacked in physical power, he made up for with a keen intellect. Ever curious, Anzu investigated the magical ley lines that crisscrossed the world, and he discovered arcane magic. For many years, these three creatures largely kept to themselves. They eked out an existence in Arak, constantly fending off attacks from primals and breakers. Only Anzu dreamed of a better future for himself and his feathered kin. Anzu called on Rukhmar and Sethe to work together to transform Arak into a sanctuary for birds of all kinds. Why should they live under the oppression of primitives like the primals and the breakers when they could rule this land for themselves? As one, Anzu and his new allies drove the children of stone and root from Arak. With the breakers and the primals gone, the region flourished into a haven for winged creatures. Rukhmar, Sethe, and Anzu settled in as caretakers of the land and its varied species. Rukhmar developed close ties with the most beautiful birds: the kaliri. She treated them as her own beloved children. She and the kaliri spent much of their time perched at the apex of Arak's spire, basking in the warmth of the sun. Though Rukhmar was noble, she was also arrogant. She saw herself as the epitome of grace and beauty among the world's creatures. She never set her talons on the ground, and she regarded the creatures that dwelled in and around the forests with disdain. Anzu watched over the multitude of lesser ravens that lived throughout Arak. He frequented the forest canopies below the spire. Sethe ruled the smaller wind serpents and lived with them among the shadowy nooks and crannies at the spire's base. He did not treat his followers with the same respect that Anzu showed the ravens. Sethe was a cruel and demanding master of the wind serpents. All seemed well in Arak, but darkness was stirring near the spire.
Over the years, Sethe became envious of Rukhmar. His wings were not as great as hers, and he could not soar through the clouds as she did. Sethe could barely even reach the top of the spire. He was doomed to live out his existence in Rukhmar's shadow. That was not a fate he would accept. Sethe dreamed of striking down Rukhmar and stealing her powers for himself, but he knew he could not do so alone. The wind serpent eventually approached Anzu and asked for his help. Once they had vanquished Rukhmar, they would soar the roof of the world. They would reign as the twin kings of Arak. Sethe had assumed that Anzu was jealous of Rukhmar's power as well. After all, the fire bird looked down on the raven with scorn for dwelling so near the ground. Yet Sethe was wrong. Anzu did not hate Rukhmar; he adored her. The raven had long harbored a secret affection for the fire bird, but he had never mustered the courage to profess his feelings for her. He knew that Rukhmar would never accept him as her equal. Anzu warned Rukhmar of Sethe's intentions. The raven and the fire bird made a pact to work against the wind serpent. On the day Sethe launched his attack, Rukhmar was ready. She engulfed Sethe in her fiery wrath and burned his wings to ash. When the wind serpent plummeted to the earth, Anzu fell upon him and clawed out his eyes. Sethe used his dying breath to exact vengeance on Rukhmar and Anzu. He wove a terrible curse through his own flesh and blood, one that seeped from his body and spread into the land itself. Fearing that the curse would destroy Arak, Anzu devoured Sethe whole and locked the wind serpent's dark energy within himself. Excruciating pain racked the raven as the curse twisted his body and soul. Anzu's form shriveled and warped, and he lost the ability to fly. Though he had paid a terrible price, Anzu had contained the curse. Only a small portion of Sethe's blood was left behind. It corrupted the area where the wind serpent had fallen, but it did not spread. This shadowy region would later become known as Sethekk Hollow.
Anzu could not bear to present himself to Rukhmar. If she had not thought him worthy before, she would be disgusted by the aberration he'd become. He disappeared into the forest deeps, and he ignored Rukhmar whenever she called for the raven to show himself.
ANZU SUCCUMBS TO THE CURSE OF SETHE Though Sethe's curse weakened Anzu, it also gave him new power. Consuming the wind serpent had granted him command over dark magic. As Anzu grew more familiar with his abilities, he shrouded himself in a realm of shadow to hide from Rukhmar forever. After much fruitless searching, Rukhmar gave up. She was humbled by Anzu's noble sacrifice, but she was also horrified by the curse that now darkened her home. Rukhmar took to the skies and left Arak. She finally settled atop Gorgrond's highest peak. Rukhmar decided that if she could not find Anzu to thank him, she would reward his sacrifice by creating a new race in his honor. The fire bird drew on her own life energies to transform some of her kaliri followers into a winged
people called the arakkoa, or the "heirs of Arak." They embodied Rukhmar's physical grace and majesty as well as Anzu's intellect and cleverness. Rukhmar intended that the arakkoa would one day return to Arak, but not yet. Sethe's curse still lingered, and the fire bird did not want her new children to suffer from it. After they had matured as a race and become wise, Rukhmar would lead them back to their ancestral home. Her only fear was that she would not live long enough to do so. Rukhmar had expended much of her own life essence to create the arakkoa. She would never be as powerful as she'd once been. The fire bird knew she would eventually grow old and pass from the world. Before that happened, she was determined to help shape and guide the arakkoa's culture.
For many generations, Rukhmar watched the arakkoa develop from afar. Occasionally she communed with the fledgling race. She told stories of Arak, of Sethe's evil, and of Anzu's nobility. Rukhmar also taught the arakkoa the rudimentary ways of commanding the Light. The arakkoa were quick learners. They mastered wielding the Light, and they became adept healers and seers. Many of their primitive customs revolved around the worship of Rukhmar. They revered her as the goddess of the sun, which they considered the source of their Light magic. The arakkoa were not content to harness the powers of the Light alone. Due to Rukhmar's teachings, they revered Anzu as a deity much in the same way they did the sun goddess. Many arakkoa discovered arcane magic and became extraordinary sorcerers. As the arakkoa flourished, Rukhmar felt her life force fading. She communed with her children one last time and urged them to claim Arak for themselves. Rukhmar took to the winds and soared south, and the arakkoa followed. Just as they reached Arak, the fire bird breathed her last breath. Flames consumed her form, and she burned like a second sun in the sky. The arakkoa took Rukhmar's passing as a sign of their own ascendancy. They vowed to create a grand civilization in Arak to honor her, one that would outshine any other culture on Draenor. The light of their knowledge and their power would blaze in the heavens just as Rukhmar had. Calling themselves the Apexis, the arakkoa claimed the highest reaches of Arak's spire. They harvested timber from the surrounding woods, and metals from the nearby mountains. They built immense gilded structures around their towering new home. Using their mastery of the Light, the Apexis also crafted enormous lanterns infused with enchanted flames, which they hung along the length of the spire. Guided by the mythical tales of Anzu and his noble sacrifice, arakkoa sorcerers investigated Sethekk Hollow. They carefully studied the pool of
cursed energy there, and they unraveled the mysteries of shadow magic. These sorcerers developed a unique ability to combine their knowledge of the arcane with the darker powers found at Sethekk Hollow. The Apexis embraced both Light and Void, believing they were natural parts of life. Two factions formed, each specializing in an opposing force. The Anhar order studied the arts of wielding holy magic. The Skalax order dedicated itself to studying shadow and arcane magics. Both groups occupied the upper echelons of Apexis society, and they shared equal prestige and influence. As the arakkoa solidified their power in Arak, they explored the world. They were not an expansionistic people, but they were curious. They forged outposts across Draenor to observe the local flora and fauna. The arakkoa studied the forests and their shapes, and they mapped out the great mountain ranges that crisscrossed the world. In awe, they realized that many of these places were the ancient remains of creatures that had once walked Draenor. Based on stories passed down from Rukhmar, the Apexis knew that the primals and the breakers were the offspring of these primordial giants. The arakkoa watched their endless warring with equal parts fascination and pity, but they never intervened. They were Rukhmar's children, and they had inherited a touch of her arrogance. To play a part in the lives of land-dwellers was seen as beneath the Apexis.
The arakkoa's rise did not go unnoticed by Draenor's other inhabitants. Near Arak, the dense forest of Talador teemed with primals. One of the most powerful was a treant known as Gnarlgar. Much like Rukhmar and her kin, this highly intelligent living tree emerged in the aftermath of Botaan's destruction. Gnarlgar commanded immense power over nature magic as well as the Spirit of Life that flowed through the wilds. Gnarlgar's knowledge of the ancient days was also vast. From the genesaur, the treant learned of the Evergrowth, the Sporemounds, and the communal sentience that had bound the forests as one. For millennia, Gnarlgar roamed the world on legs of tangled roots. The treant used its magics to strengthen the other primals in their war against the breakers. Gnarlgar also honed its own abilities and learned how to influence the minds of its plant kin. Before long, the treant could manipulate other primals and guide their actions. Gnarlgar found the botani to be the most promising of the world's primals. If they were cultivated properly, the treant knew they could become a force of extraordinary might. Gnarlgar became the botani's caretaker, and it refined their culture. The treant taught them the truth of the Sporemounds, convincing them that they would one day restore the Evergrowth to its former glory. Though the botani existed throughout Draenor, those in Talador were the most numerous and advanced. They became the heart of their race's culture. Gnarlgar taught Talador's botani unique ways to harness nature magic. They crafted pools of potent nature energies, which they used to transfer the spirits of fallen genesaur into new bodies. While the botani focused their attention on battling the breakers, Gnarlgar became aware of the Apexis. Their civilization was an affront against nature itself, something artificial that did not belong on the world. What was worse, the arakkoa abused the wilds and killed entire forests to build their unnatural golden temples and cities.
Gnarlgar knew that these arakkoa were something far more dangerous than the breakers. Their devastating magics had the power to burn nature to cinders or inundate it with shadow energy. Unless the arakkoa were stopped, Gnarlgar believed they would soon conquer the whole of Draenor. The treant would not let that come to pass. Gnarlgar departed Talador in search of something from the primordial days, something it could use as a weapon against the Apexis. In time, the treant came across a massive fossilized root, one of the few intact pieces of Botaan that still remained in the world. After returning to Talador, Gnarlgar rallied the botani to its side and made a proclamation: to revive the Evergrowth, they must first defeat the blasphemous Apexis civilization. Then the treant revealed the root it had recovered. Gnarlgar told the botani they would use it to craft a new Sporemound, one greater than any that had come before it. The monstrous creature would stand at the head of their army and cast the Apexis from their lofty spire. Gnarlgar planted the root deep within Talador and began a great ritual to nourish it. Thousands of botani willingly sacrificed themselves, and the treant infused their spirits into the root. Slowly leaves and branches sprouted from the earth. These in turn grew into a mound of thorny brambles and leathery fronds. Gnarlgar named the burgeoning Sporemound Taala. As Taala took shape, the primals made preparations for war. The botani awakened new genesaur from their birthing pools. Meanwhile, Gnarlgar channeled the Spirit of Life into the forest and gifted thousands of trees with intelligence and will. These trees became known as the Gnarled. They uprooted themselves and walked the earth just as their creator did. Gnarlgar ordered them to form the front lines of its army, enchanting their trunks and boughs to ward off the arakkoa's flames and shadowy curses. Tens of thousands of primals, bristling with nature magic and bedecked in armor of thorns, gathered in Talador. There, they watched and they waited as Taala's awakening neared.
The Apexis ignored the stirrings in Talador at first, believing them to be part of the war between the primals and the breakers. Yet the forests at the edge of Arak soon grew thicker. Vines crept toward the spire, planting seeds that sprouted into hundreds of new trees with astonishing speed. As the wilds encroached on the spire, members of the Anhar and the Skalax orders investigated Talador. Very few of these scouts ever returned. Those who did reported horrifying news. The trees themselves had come alive, and thousands of botani and genesaur were girding themselves for battle. Yet the most troubling discovery was the monstrous creature forming in the center of Talador. Arakkoa scouts reported that it was already larger than a genesaur. From what they had gleaned of the Evergrowth, the Apexis feared that this emergent being could be one of the giants that had shaped the infant world. If such a creature awoke, it would annihilate the arakkoa and bring devastation to the rest of Draenor.
THE BOTANI BRING A NEW SPOREMOUND TO LIFE The Anhari and the Skalaxi leaders had no choice but to act. Their race's survival depended on it. The two orders mobilized the Apexis and hastily formed an invasion force. The Anhari priests and Skalaxi sorcerers formed the bulk of the arakkoa military. They stormed through the skies over Talador. Guided by the Anhari and the Skalaxi leaders, the arakkoa ignored the primals they came across and focused on destroying the monstrosity forming deep in the forest. The Apexis army descended into Talador's murky depths to find Taala, and brutal fighting engulfed the arakkoa and the primals. The Anhari priests carved through the wilds with blades of enchanted flame, and the Skalaxi sorcerers enfeebled their enemies with curses. Yet despite the powers at their
command, the arakkoa could not break the primals. Gnarlgar entered a trance that allowed the treant to touch the minds of the primals and coordinate their movements. Every vine and root moved against the Apexis. The primals worked in perfect unity, routing the arakkoa and driving them back to the skies. The defeat shocked the Anhar and the Skalax orders. Nearly half of their forces had fallen in battle. The arakkoa scrambled for a means to defeat the primals. It was the Anhar order that proposed a solution. Its priests had devised an ingenious new weapon, which they called the Breath of Rukhmar. This mechanism would channel the energies of the sun and allow the arakkoa to wield incredibly destructive powers. The Anhari crafters began building this device atop the spire's highest point. Meanwhile, Gnarlgar quickened Taala's maturation. The treant knew the time had come to attack the arakkoa, before they could regroup and strengthen their defenses. Gnarlgar ordered more botani to sacrifice themselves, and it shunted their spirits into the Sporemound's veins. Finally, Taala stirred. Giant fronds unfurled from around it, and the Sporemound rose up to its full height, towering over the forest canopy. The monstrous thorn-skinned creature took its first step, and the forests trembled with awe. Gnarlgar entered a trance once again, reaching out its mind to Taala and the other primals. At the treant's command, they marched toward the spire.
The Apexis watched the primals slowly approach, the awakened Sporemound silhouetted on the horizon. The Anhari's weapon was not yet finished, and they feared they could not complete it before their enemies reached the spire. The arakkoa were doomed. A small number of brave Skalaxi sorcerers were not ready to give up. They volunteered to waylay the primals and give their Anhari allies the time they needed to complete the Breath of Rukhmar. During their defeat in Talador, these sorcerers had discovered Gnarlgar and learned of the treant's ability to guide the actions of the botani and other creatures. If they could assassinate the primals' leader, the Skalaxi sorcerers would deal a great blow to their enemies. The Skalaxi shrouded themselves in shadow to elude the approaching primal army. They reached Talador and stalked unseen through the forests until they found Gnarlgar. Just before the sorcerers launched their attack, Gnarlgar sensed their presence. The enraged treant broke away from its trance and quickly disposed of the Skalaxi, but not before the sorcerers had bent their dark powers against the creature. A curse bloomed within Gnarlgar. The creeping rot spread through the treant's roots and boughs. Gnarlgar withered into a blackened husk and collapsed beside the bodies of its assassins. Gnarlgar's death broke the unity of the primals. Confusion rippled through Taala and its kin. For a time, the primals halted at the edge of Arak before continuing their march. Destroying Gnarlgar had only delayed the primals, but it was enough for the arakkoa priests to finish their work. Just as Taala reached the spire, the Anhari ignited their weapon. A violent tremor shook the spire as fierce energies roared through the Breath of Rukhmar. A beam of white-hot fire exploded from the mechanism and lanced through Taala's chest. The Anhari weapon blew the Sporemound apart in a cloud of ember and ash.
The Anhari then turned their wrath on the rest of the primals. The Breath of Rukhmar sliced through the botani, the Gnarled, and the genesaur, incinerating thousands in the blink of an eye. The few primals who remained retreated back to Talador in terror. The Anhari gave no quarter. They engulfed the fleeing primals in flames, and they scoured the forests that had crept into Arak. Once the arakkoa halted their attack, blackened earth and smoldering roots stretched out from the spire as far as the eye could see. The Apexis victory permanently blunted the might of nature. The Evergrowth would never return again, in any form. A new golden age of mortal civilization dawned on Draenor.
Centuries after defeating the resurgent Evergrowth, the Apexis had flourished into an empire, and their population swelled. The high-minded arakkoa saw themselves as the most powerful force in the world-a force that not even the mightiest of the primals had been able to contend with. With nothing to threaten their existence, the Apexis devoted themselves to the advancement of science and magic. Knowledge became the most coveted resource in their culture. The Anhar and the Skalax orders became the caretakers of wisdom. It was their duty to catalog history, the study of magic, and information about the world and its various creatures. Rather than keeping this knowledge in tomes or scrolls, the Apexis developed something else. Anhari priests and Skalaxi sorcerers combined their magics to create crystalline storage devices. By merely touching one of these crystals, an arakkoa could consume all of the knowledge stored within it. They could even experience the memories of whoever had crafted the device. The Apexis applied their magics to the creation of mechanical constructs that could do their bidding. The arakkoa had always been arrogant, and they became even more so after their victory. They deemed those who walked the world's surface to be unclean. The Apexis used their constructs to mine metals from the earth and gather resources from the ground. Religion also defined the Apexis and their daily lives. The Anhari priests constructed a gleaming sun temple around the mechanism they had used to annihilate Taala. Hundreds of arakkoa gathered at this site each year to commemorate the Apexis victory and honor Rukhmar. Other arakkoa visited shrines carved into the solid rock near the foot of the spire. There, Skalaxi sorcerers performed rituals to honor the raven god, Anzu, and his ancient sacrifice.
PRIMAL, BREAKER, AND APEXIS TERRITORIES OF ANCIENT DRAENOR The Apexis culture seemed destined to continue its rise, but such was not the case. A bitter rivalry developed between the Anhar and the Skalax orders as each vied for the support of the greater populace. The Anhari knew that to seize power over their race, they would need to control knowledge. The order's leader, Priest-Lord Velthreek, told his followers to gather as many of the Apexis crystals as they could. Over a number of years, the Anhari did so in secret. They hoarded the crystals and stored them within their sun temple atop the spire. The Skalaxi and their leader, Sorcerer-Lord Salavass, eventually uncovered what was happening. They believed that knowledge was a basic right for all arakkoa and that it should be available to every member of their race. Salavass called for the immediate release of the crystals from the sun temple. Velthreek ignored the demand. He declared the Anhari the sole rulers of the Apexis. The order would decide who could access the crystals and their knowledge. In addition, Velthreek claimed that he and the Anhari were the living representatives of Rukhmar herself. Therefore, following the order's teachings was the only way the arakkoa could attain the sun goddess's favor. Salavass was a cunning arakkoa, and he foresaw what would happen to his order if they did not act. The Skalaxi would become marginalized in society,
and they would gradually lose influence. The sorcerer-lord gathered his followers and struck at the sun temple. If the Anhari would not share the Apexis crystals, the Skalaxi would take them by force. At the gates of the sun temple, a terrible battle erupted between the two orders. It quickly spilled into the lower levels of the spire. Some arakkoa sided with the Anhari; others, with the Skalaxi. For many months, a civil war engulfed every corner of Apexis civilization. To turn the tide of the conflict, the Anhari harnessed the Breath of Rukhmar. They ignited the colossal weapon and prepared to incinerate the Skalaxi and their followers. Against the Breath of Rukhmar, Salavass knew that the Skalaxi were doomed. Yet he would not give in. He led a handful of his most gifted sorcerers to the top of the spire. They stormed through the Anhari guardians and reached the Breath of Rukhmar itself. As the Anhari cut down the intruders, Salavass wove a spell to destabilize the Breath of Rukhmar. It worked, but the result was catastrophic. A furious explosion erupted from the mechanism, instantly killing most of the arakkoa on the spire and shattering the land. After the light of the blast dimmed, all was dark. The explosion had split Arak's single spire into numerous smaller stone towers. The surrounding region was left a barren wasteland. In time, it became known as the Spires of Arak. It would take generations for life to bloom in the area again, and even longer for the surviving arakkoa to recover from what had happened. The Apexis society was no more, but from its ashes new cultures would arise.
THE REBIRTH OF RUKHMAR During the height of the Apexis culture, a small group of Anhari priests sought out the remains of Rukhmar. They found her charred bones near the spire, and they used their magics to resurrect the great bird. The Anhari succeeded, but only partially. This new Rukhmar had but a sliver of the original deity's power and intelligence. Nonetheless, the Apexis worshipped her as the goddess reborn. The Anhari infused her with their Light powers, granting the fire bird a long life so she could soar the skies for millennia.


The Apexis empire, while it was still at its height, permanently shattered the power of the Evergrowth. This allowed other races the opportunity to grow, free from the threat of having their burgeoning societies choked away by the primals. Conflict between these emergent cultures and the arakkoa was rare; they did not occupy the same land, nor did they survive on the same resources. The arakkoa soared through the skies, and those on the ground needed not fear them. But the descendants of Grond did not live peacefully with one another. By the time arakkoan civilization had fallen, the children of stone had grown in number and spread across the land. Relatively small populations of gronn, powerful and massive giants who towered above the jungles and forests, still roamed the world. They lived in solitude; no place on Draenor could sustain the hunting needs for multiple gronn at once. When they met, they often fought to the death over territory. Other creatures, smaller in stature than the gronn, came together to form
rudimentary societies. The ogron, though brutish, cruel beings, quickly learned the value of working together. Strength in numbers meant the conquest of their rivals. Isolation meant defeat and death. These early tribes warred constantly. The pride of an ogron was easily wounded, and only blood could repay an insult. Most of the world's other races were beneath their notice, save when they could serve as food or slave labor. Even the races that shared a common ancestry with the ogron were not spared. Ogres and orcs quickly learned to fear the attention of the larger ogron. The best fate a conquered ogre clan could hope for was to be sent into battle as disposable combatants to fight against other ogron tribes. Sick, weak, or elderly ogres were typically offered as living sacrifices to appease the gronn and keep them from attacking ogron territories. The smallest of Grond's descendants were the orcs, and they stayed far, far away from ogron lands. The largest orc settlement of this time was in a massive cave network beneath Gorgrond. Though it was not a bountiful region, the orcs preferred living a meager-but free-existence to enduring the horrors of life as ogron slaves.
In the centuries after the Apexis society collapsed, arakkoa priests and sorcerers had spread across the land, taking with them many of their race's coveted crystal shards. Small conclaves of Skalaxi arakkoa began searching the land for more of these nuggets of knowledge and power. Some sought personal glory. Some sought to preserve the wonders of their fallen people. Some even believed that a new golden age might emerge if the arakkoa could collect enough of this ancient wisdom and build their society anew. The Skalaxi leader, Yonzi, learned that critical caches of knowledge were buried beneath the ruins of an Apexis coastal settlement in Talador, a place now occupied by ogron. Attempts to bribe or barter with the ogron rulers ended violently. Though far less intelligent creatures, the ogron were quite formidable when it came to size and strength. The arakkoa retreated, biding their time. Yonzi and his followers observed the ogron tribe from the sky, searching for opportunities to topple the brutes by force. One quickly presented itself: the ogron's slaves. The ogres, though not as mighty as their barbaric masters, were more intelligent. Most importantly, their enslavement made them angry. Only fear kept them from revolting. Arakkoa sorcerers began to approach the ogres in secret, offering to teach them the ways of arcane magic. The slaves proved to be excellent students. They were distant descendants of Grond, a creature empowered by the titan Aggramar, and thus they were naturally attuned to the arcane. The Skalaxi were surprised and delighted by this discovery. They had never seen new spellcasting techniques be developed so effortlessly. The ogres held a special affinity for the earth, and they could use arcane power to shape and bend rock and stone to their will. One of the first ogres to master this new power was named Gog, and the Skalaxi believed he was the perfect leader to inspire a full-scale rebellion. Empowered, Gog strode forth...but not to fight the ogron. He had a far more
significant target in mind: the gronn, the giant predators whom all ogres revered and feared as deities. Even the arakkoa were stunned at his ambition, but they couldn't argue with the results. Gog single-handedly struck down a gronn, and the story of his bloody conquest spread among the captive ogres like wildfire. He killed another. And another. By the time he defeated his fifth gronn, whispers of his deeds had reached almost all ogre settlements. Gronn were seen as towering monstrosities, practically gods in stature and power. They could not be killed, not by the likes of an ogre. At least, that was what the slaves had once believed. Gog's heroics had shattered that belief. If gronn could be slain, what did the ogres have to fear from the ogron? When "Gog the Gronnslayer" returned to his people, there was no need to spend time convincing the other slaves to revolt. They rose up together against their ogron overlords, igniting a bloody war. There was a catastrophic loss of life on both sides. The arakkoa patiently watched from a distance, eager to claim their crystals from the ogron settlement. In the end, nearly every ogron tribe fell to their captives. The ogres' thirst for vengeance and their newfound arcane magics were too much to withstand. The ogron who were not torn limb from limb were forced to scatter across the world to escape. After the ogres cast off the chains of slavery, the Skalaxi sorcerers quietly moved in, searching for Apexis relics and artifacts in the ruins of the city. Gog the Gronnslayer put a quick end to that. As a sorcerer himself, he had no interest in giving away any potential source of power. The ogres had paid for the land with blood. Gog declared himself "Gorgog"-King Gog-and proclaimed that he was ruler of this city. He renamed it Goria, the "Throne of the King." Gog commanded Yonzi and his Skalaxi followers to leave the area on pain of death. The arakkoa did leave, but not for long. Gog's actions infuriated Yonzi and his kin, and they decided to take the land by force. In the dead of night, the arakkoa sorcerers launched a surprise attack on the fledgling city of Goria. Gog and his apprentice arcanists fought back, bolstered by the countless ranks of newly freed ogres who saw him as their savior. The king defeated the arakkoa and captured Yonzi. The Skalaxi leader's death did not come slow.
The tales of Yonzi's gruesome end at Gog's hands spread across the land. Despite the promise of undiscovered Apexis crystals, further arakkoan incursions on ogre holdings were few and far between after that. The Gorian Empire slowly expanded over generations. Though the ogres were not focused on conquest, wide swaths of land fell under their control. Roaming gronn and ogron were hunted down wherever they were found, paving the way for new settlements. Cities sprang up throughout the world's continents. The two largest were Highmaul, located in western Nagrand, and Bladespire Hold, tucked away in Frostfire Ridge. These cities became highly militant outposts that constantly expanded the ogre empire's borders. An advanced trade network, crossing land and sea, was established to link Goria with the far-flung strongholds. Goria itself remained the capital and a distinguished place for apprentices to train in the arcane arts. Apexis crystals became highly prized there, the fragments of arakkoan knowledge eagerly sought by the most learned ogre sorcerers. The ogres' practice of sorcery and their exposure to raw arcane magic had some unexpected side effects. Though it was very rare, children would sometimes be born with two heads. It soon became clear that these ogres were astonishingly gifted spellcasters, and their appearance was seen as a good omen. In time, Goria's arcanists even developed spells to replicate this phenomenon, causing normal ogres to grow a second head, increasing their intelligence and aptitude for magic.
The ogre revolt dramatically altered the hierarchy of survival throughout Draenor. In breaking the power of the ogron and the gronn, the Gorian Empire eliminated the two greatest threats to Gorgrond's orcs. No longer confined to their underground caverns, they forged permanent settlements on the world's surface for the first time in generations. The population of orcs exploded. Before long, overcrowding became a serious issue, and Gorgrond's scant wildlife was hunted to the brink of extinction. Tensions between families simmered, but before they boiled over into a catastrophic war, many of the orcs migrated out of the region. They did not need a comfortable existence-their harsh life underground had made them resilient and strong-but they needed new land to settle. The orcs who remained in Gorgrond gradually formed several distinct clans: Blackrock, Laughing Skull, Lightning's Blade, and Dragonmaw. The Blackrock clan lorded over much of Gorgrond. They remained in their ancestral caves, studying the earth around them, developing their knowledge of metallurgy and smithing. The unique blackrock ore scattered throughout the area was difficult to mine and use, but once they learned its secrets, the orcs were able to create astonishing tools and weapons. Blackrock blades were soon coveted for their reliability and durability. The orcs who migrated east found themselves drawn to Tanaan's lush jungles. The region was filled with primals, and the orcs discovered that their new home was tremendously perilous. Though there was no shortage of wild game, poisonous plants and venomous animals thrived in the jungle. One mistake could lead to a slow, agonizing death. It became commonplace to hear forbidding tales about mighty orcs who were paralyzed by a single snake bite and then dragged away into the wilds by unseen creatures. Moreover, there were dark caves and hollows that seemed to vibrate with sinister power. Sometimes the orcs who tapped into this shadowy essence found glory.
Sometimes they found madness. Tanaan's orc population adopted a savage, superstitious mindset. Those who kept their sanity called themselves the Bleeding Hollow clan. Those who truly lost themselves to the dark impulses of the wilds were exiled. Over time, they formed another, smaller clan: the Bonechewers, so named for their willingness to resort to cannibalism in times of hardship. The two clans were never allies, but rarely were they at war. The jungle was a dangerous enough enemy for both. The orcs who traveled west of Gorgrond settled in the bleak and icy region of Frostfire Ridge, named for its brutal winters and volcanic activity. Some of these orcs believed they should adapt to the environment. Two clans, the Frostwolves and the Whiteclaws, learned to hunt alongside the region's native wolves, even befriending and training them as companions. Other orcs sought to dominate the land. The Thunderlord clan roamed the frozen wastes in huge packs, often hunting the fearsome gronn. A single kill could sustain them for weeks, but when a hunt failed, the orcs would suffer great hardship. The orcs who ventured south found the rich, fertile land of Talador. Three clans settled in the region's mountains and plains: the Burning Blade, the Redwalkers, and the Bladewinds.
MAP OF ORCCLAN LOCATIONS ACROSS DRAENOR
DRAGONMAW CLAN In the Orcish tongue, the Dragonmaw clan is called Nelghor-shomash, or "Cry of the Beasts." The clan earned its name after learning to tame the fierce rylaks, winged creatures that hunted on the outskirts of Gorgrond. The Dragonmaw fondly referred to them as nelghor, or "loyal beasts." When the clan later encountered dragons in the world of Azeroth, it would apply this term to those creatures as well. All orcs would eventually refer to dragons as nelghor. The name of the Dragonmaw clan never changed, but its meaning surely did.
A fourth clan migrated even farther southwest, deep into Nagrand's open prairies. It was known as the Warsong clan, and its orcs roamed the grasslands like nomads, rarely staying in the same place for more than a few months. The Warsongs had to constantly fight against the Gorian Empire's ogres to maintain their presence in Nagrand. Some generations of Warsongs thrived more than others. The clan had a taste for battle, but when its warriors provoked the ogres too much, the consequences sometimes proved disastrous. To the southeast, another clan formed in Shadowmoon Valley. These orcs dwelled far from major Gorian settlements, allowing them to live in relative peace. The Shadowmoon clan became fascinated with the starry sky, and they believed they could glean the future from stellar movements. The region's orcs were a deeply mystical people, and they developed traditions and rituals centered around astrology and ancestor worship.
Shadowmoon mystics frequently set out on pilgrimages across the world, hoping to hear the will of the divine. Many of these travelers received strange dreams and visions near the mountains of northwestern Nagrand. Unbeknownst to the orcs, this was the final resting place of Grond. Elemental energies suffused the area, particularly at the base of the mountains. There, the ancient giant's head formed a small island in the middle of a tranquil lake. The first Shadowmoon visitors to this place learned about the world's primordial spirits of fire, air, earth, and water. The orcs treated these beings with the utmost respect, and they named the site of their discovery the Throne of the Elements. The birth of shamanism among the orcs was a gentle process. These children of stone flocked to Grond's remains and learned to guide the elemental spirits with open hearts and a sense of harmony. Unlike the ogres, whose ruthless sorcery tore and shaped the earth, the orcs held their power in absolute reverence. And when the elements granted a shaman power, the results were astonishing. Floods could be turned aside. Strong winds could push back arakkoa raiders. No orc had ever seen such miracles. No orc had ever held such ties with the natural world.
THE THRONE OF THE ELEMENTS The Shadowmoon were the first to dedicate themselves to the elements, and they transformed Grond's head into a crude temple. Soon, they spread their teachings to other orcs, and nearly every clan adopted the practice. Young orcs were raised from birth to be stalwart, steadfast allies of the elemental spirits. When they came of age, these fledgling shaman traveled to the Throne of the Elements to seek the spirits' blessing. They entered trances to attune their minds to the elements. Some orcs were found worthy; others were not. In the act of reaching beyond the veil of the physical world, a few orcs even found themselves communing with dark forces. These poor souls accidentally glimpsed a realm beyond Draenor-the realm of the Void. What
the orcs saw drove them insane. The ones who survived were exiled from their clans and forced to live in seclusion in the caves beneath Nagrand. White skulls were tattooed on their faces, marking them as "dead" to their people. Those orcs who were welcomed by the elements returned to their clans as respected spiritual leaders. Their counsel was highly valued, second only to the words of the clan chieftain. The bond between shaman crossed clan boundaries, allowing them to mediate arguments and solve conflicts peacefully. The Shadowmoon clan began a biannual gathering of shaman called the Kosh'harg festival. Soon, this meeting grew to include all orcs. The Kosh'harg became a rare time when the clans could put aside their rivalries, share news, foster ties, and feast in friendship.
Despite the growth and migration of the ogre and orc peoples, no clan or empire ever dared to expand into the Spires of Arak. The broken ruins of the arakkoan civilization were thought to be cursed and haunted, and the winged creatures zealously guarded their holdings. The arakkoa who still called the region home had become dark, troubled, and superstitious. Though they named themselves the "high arakkoa," they were but a pale shadow of what their race had once been. The glory of the Apexis empire had long ago faded. Only fragments of its knowledge remained, much of it pieced together incorrectly. A line of kings ruled over the high arakkoa, sharing power with the remnants of the Anhar order. The priesthood still worshipped Rukhmar, but her teachings had become twisted and distorted by time. The Apexis empire had treated Anzu's sacrifice with reverence, preserving Sethekk Hollow and studying it carefully to learn its shadowy powers. That respect had long since disappeared. The high arakkoa now used Sethekk Hollow as a place of punishment and execution. Any who disagreed with the Anhari priests were deemed heretics and cast into the region's pools, which were still cursed from the blood of the wind serpent god, Sethe. Most of the unfortunate arakkoa who were thrown into Sethekk Hollow died. The others were deformed and rendered flightless by the dark energies that inundated the area. They became known as the Outcasts, and they were exiled from all high arakkoan settlements. Confined to the ground, the Outcasts were forced to contend with a cunning predator in the region: the saberon. This intelligent feline race roamed throughout Draenor. After the fall of the Apexis empire, many saberon tribes had migrated to the Spires of Arak. They delighted in hunting Outcasts, who could not escape into the sky. For a time, only these cursed arakkoa were in danger from the saberon. Then came a saberon tribe that made it a sport to bring down the arakkoa who could still fly. The Bloodmane tribe and its mighty leader, Pridelord
Karash, had grown bored with preying on the Outcasts. Karash trained his followers in the use of nets, ropes, and harpoons. The Bloodmane targeted isolated high arakkoa scouts at first, honing their craft without warning those who lived atop the Spires of Arak. Once he was confident in his tribe's abilities, Karash declared war on the high arakkoa. Bloodmane fighters began ambushing large groups of the winged creatures, slaughtering them to the last. This threw the high arakkoa into disarray; for generations they had imagined themselves immune to threats from any "lower" creatures. The Anhari priests struggled to explain why Rukhmar had apparently withdrawn her favor, and the spires themselves came under siege. The king of the high arakkoa, Terokk, saw his people falling to despair and knew he needed to take drastic action. Before he committed his soldiers to battle, he launched raids by himself, diving into Bloodmane encampments and eviscerating their defenses before a single one of his subjects was put in danger. He single-handedly turned the tide of the war, inspiring other exceptional arakkoa fighters to follow him against suicidal odds. After months of whittling away the Bloodmane, Terokk cornered Pridelord Karash and slew him, ending the source of the saberon's tactical brilliance. The war had been won. The high arakkoa celebrated their king as a living legend, some even declaring that he must be the reincarnation of Rukhmar herself. The Anhari priests grew nervous-until now, only they had been allowed to speak in the sun goddess's name. Terokk used his widespread support to build a new city in the clouds. It was known as Skyreach, and it would call back to the accomplishments of the ancient Apexis. Terokk even instituted new laws restricting the authority of the Anhar order, declaring that high arakkoan society must be guided by a thirst for knowledge and wisdom, not by fear and superstition. That prompted the Anhari to action. In the dead of night, the priests kidnapped Terokk and his daughter, Lithic, and cast them into Sethekk Hollow. The next day, the priests told their people that Rukhmar had withdrawn her favor from the king and cursed his bloodline. They called themselves the Adherents of Rukhmar, and they declared that they were to be the stewards of the high arakkoa's future. Never again would there be an arakkoa king; the priests would jealously cling to control of their civilization
until it ended in fire and bloodshed centuries later. Meanwhile, Terokk struggled to endure his new life as an Outcast. He had survived the fall into the cursed pools, but Lithic had not. The ordeal had left Terokk physically and mentally twisted. Anguished, angry, and alone, he very nearly succumbed to his grief in Sethekk Hollow, but in the darkness, a voice urged him to move forward. Terokk gathered the other Outcast arakkoa and sought out the source of the mysterious voice. In time, the fallen king understood that he was speaking to the dread raven god Anzu. This astonished the deformed arakkoa-Anzu was revered as a creature long dead, not a being who could still affect the world. The raven god taught Terokk and his followers the secrets of sorcery and shadow magic, giving rise to powerful Outcasts known as talonpriests. Empowered by Anzu's guidance, Terokk led the Outcasts to ancient Apexis ruins and built the city of Skettis on their bones. This small refuge served as an anchor for their territory. In time, they would assert dominion over the forests near the Spires of Arak, and their lands would become known as Terokkar Forest. It was a dark, tormented existence. The curse of Sethekk Hollow tore at Terokk's mind, bringing him to the brink of total insanity. He desperately sought a solution to his affliction, resorting to brutal methods to find any cure. When he began to sacrifice his own followers, the talonpriests sorrowfully subdued their leader. They sealed him away in the same realm of shadow where Anzu had once hidden, keeping him alive but protecting the Outcasts from his madness. In the centuries to come, the Outcasts avoided the high arakkoa. Whenever the Adherents of Rukhmar cast out dissenters and heretics, the talonpriests welcomed them into their society. Slowly, the Outcasts grew in number, until their population rivaled that of the high arakkoa.
For generations, orc clans lived on the fringes of the Gorian Empire, trading blows over territorial disputes but never committing to all-out war with the ogres. For their part, the Gorians had little interest in (or fear of) the orcs. The ogres focused their efforts on claiming fragments of Apexis crystals and any other sources of power they could find in the world. Some orc clans sought out these artifacts, too, but only because of the lavish prices ogre merchants would pay for them. Gorian sorcery had reached new heights of power and structure. The entire system of ogre rule and justice had been codified in support of magic and the wisdom of sorcerer kings, called imperators. Ogres were amused by the orcs' practice of shamanism, seeing the tradition as nothing more than quaint trickery to make the wind blow a little harder or a fire burn a little hotter. It wasn't until ogres witnessed the might of an elder shaman-turning away a flash flood that would have destroyed an orc village-that they began to understand the true power of the elements. Rather than seeking to learn this power with the same humility and awe that the orcs had, the ogres decided to take it by force. The Gorian leader of this time, Imperator Molok, sent an army into orc territory and claimed the Throne of the Elements for his empire. The incursion enraged the orc shaman, but the clans themselves were not yet stirred to action. The Gorians had not engaged in wanton slaughter; they had simply driven away the orcs. The ogres eagerly dissected the Throne of the Elements with their arcane spellwork, examining every inch of the site. Unbeknownst to the ogres, this land was the final resting place of Grond, the massive giant empowered by the titan Aggramar. The Gorian sorcerers never could have imagined the mix of raw titan and elemental power that still lingered in the ancient giant's remains, and their careless experiments were disastrous. One fateful day, the dissonance between the ogres' magic and Grond's residual energies ignited an explosion. The temple the orcs had carved out of the giant's skull was blown apart and
destroyed. The blast killed every Gorian sorcerer inside the structure and left behind only some standing stones that remain to this day. This act threw the elements out of balance, leading to far-reaching effects. Huge storms lashed across the world, and Draenor's native spirits descended into turmoil. And yet, the Gorians sent more sorcerers to replace the ones who had been killed. Imperator Molok was not deterred in the slightest. He now had proof of the true power of the elements, and he was determined to claim it for himself. The tormented elementals cried out to the orc shaman for help. Finally, the clans were moved to act.
At the next Kosh'harg festival, there was no celebration or revelry, only mourning for what had happened to the Throne of the Elements. The clans' shaman struggled together to calm Draenor's native spirits and bring them back into balance, to no avail. Not only were destructive storms raging across the world, but the elementals had been rattled. Within a few seasons, every clan would undoubtedly suffer a famine the likes of which had never been seen, one that might not ever end. The Shadowmoon clan's elder shaman, Nelgarm, made an impassioned plea to all of the clans to act. The elements were calling for help. The reckless ogre sorcerers were still meddling with the sacred Throne of the Elements. The world itself was on the verge of suffering irreversible harm. The clans agreed to join together, and Nelgarm called upon the elements to bless this unity with their protection. The orcs marched to war as a single people. The clans first descended on the Throne of the Elements. Utterly surprised by the attack, the Gorian sorcerers retreated with little bloodshed. Yet Imperator Molok was quick to retaliate. The armies of the Gorian Empire moved en masse, attacking and slaughtering every orc encampment they could find. Total war engulfed Draenor. Now all orcs were targets. Every village and dwelling, every male, female, and child, had to be prepared to fight. The Gorians imagined that this merciless tactic would strike terror into the hearts of their enemies. They certainly were not expecting the clans to rise to the challenge. Small, mobile groups of orc raiders slowly dismantled the Gorian Empire's network of fortresses and trading outposts, pushing the ogre armies back to their capital city: Goria.

ORC CLANS RALLY FOR WAR
Goria's fortifications were significant, and the orcs saw no reason to waste countless lives breaking them down. They kept their distance on the hills surrounding the ogre city, content to starve out their enemy. The Gorians believed they could outlast any siege; they had ships and an ocean port, which the orcs could only threaten with help from the distressed elemental spirits. Due to the tumultuous state of the elements, the shaman were not as effective in calling on their powers as they once had been. But as the months passed, the ogres found themselves unable to maintain their empire. They had been wrong in thinking that they could solely rely on trade via the ocean to support their city. It simply wasn't enough. The ogres needed access to their network of land-based trade routes, which the orcs had severed. Imperator Molok and his sorcerers revisited their Apexis crystals, searching for a way to break the siege. In time, they discovered the ancient arakkoan legend about the Curse of Sethe, and they began experimenting with ways to induce a similar affliction among the orcs. They succeeded. A new affliction called the "red pox" spread like wildfire through the orcs' encampments. This wasting disease was highly contagious, lasted for months, and killed many of the infected. The orcs found their number of healthy combatants dwindling rapidly. After consulting the elements, Nelgarm and his fellow shaman learned that this was not a natural disease; it was an unseen attack from the ogres. Uncertainty took hold in the clan chieftains as they realized that the siege was now doomed to fail-too many orcs would die before Goria succumbed. And with so many warriors ill, a frontal assault against the city was no longer possible. Time was running out. Nelgarm and the other orc shaman decided to take a very dangerous step to secure victory: they beseeched the elements to annihilate Goria. Never before had shaman made such a violent request. Yet both the orcs and the elemental spirits understood that Imperator Molok would resume meddling with the Throne of the Elements if the clans failed.
The shaman gathered outside Goria's mighty walls and witnessed the true fury of the spirits. What happened next would never be forgotten. A roaring storm churned above the city. The ground groaned and trembled. Over the course of hours, lightning and earthquakes brought down every wall and every building inside Goria. Fire enveloped the ruins, sealing off the escape routes and burning the ships in the capital's harbor. When there was nothing left but ash and rubble, the earth itself wrenched open like a giant maw, and Imperator Molok and the remains of his great city were swallowed whole. Untold thousands of ogres died that day. The elementals let none survive. Only whispers of the event would reach the other Gorian cities and outposts, but those whispers would be enough to discourage any further tampering with the elements. The orcs stood victorious but not jubilant. They had suffered tremendous losses, and they had witnessed a destructive power they never wanted to see again. Nelgarm and the other shaman were particularly frightened by the elementals' wrath. They said that the need for a unified army had passed and that the clans should go their separate ways. There was little argument. The clans returned to their lands, but life had changed forever. The red pox never truly disappeared. Every few generations, an outbreak would wreak havoc among the clans. The Gorian Empire never recovered. The ogres' remaining fortresses- particularly Highmaul and Bladespire Hold-secured their own territories. They would gradually become more akin to individual city-states than a unified nation. The Gorians sought no retribution for the loss of their capital, for they feared what else it would cost them. With Goria itself gone, ogre territory was far more vulnerable. Many orc clans seized chunks of their enemy's land by force. More and more, orcs surpassed ogres to become the most advanced, dominant race in the world. That would soon change.
Ages before the fall of Goria, events transpired that would one day change the orc race's future... Far from Draenor, Sargeras and his Burning Legion defeated the titan Pantheon. Now nothing could oppose the demons and their quest to destroy all life in the universe. Yet Sargeras needed new allies to continue his work. His ranks of demons were wild, difficult to control. He required lieutenants and tacticians who could help him guide the unruly Legion, and he found them among a highly intelligent race called the eredar. Led by three wise rulers-Archimonde, Kil'jaeden, and Velen-the eredar had turned their world, Argus, into a paradise that held knowledge and philosophy in high esteem. When Sargeras corrupted these beings, most of them willingly accepted their fate. They reveled in the opportunity to act as the Legion's commanders, and they brought the demonic army into line. A number of eredar resisted. Velen was the sole leader who did not give himself over to Sargeras. He led other dissidents on a daring escape from Argus-an escape that was only possible with the help of beings known as the naaru. These creatures of the Holy Light were sworn protectors of the cosmos and its inhabitants, and they had foreseen the eredar's corruption. For thousands of years, Velen and most of the draenei-or "exiled ones," in the eredar tongue-fled from the Legion, seeking a refuge in the cosmos. They traveled between the physical universe and the Twisting Nether aboard a dimensional fortress called the Genedar. This naaru-powered vessel could transport the draenei across vast distances. It had been a dangerous journey. Velen's draenei had successfully evaded almost all contact with the Legion, and the demons had little luck in tracking them. With three naaru aiding the renegades-K'ure, K'ara, and D'ore-the draenei could sense the approach of their hunters. Every time that happened, the exiles would pull up stakes and disappear into the stars. Velen knew that his people would never have a chance to resist the Legion
with force until they found a world to settle. Until then, the Genedar was the draenei's only true home. But traveling through the cosmos required incredible amounts of energy. The naaru's spirits had to bear the burden of this extended journey, and over time, they weakened. As their radiant energies flagged, the Genedar threatened to fall apart. The naaru knew that the time for running had come to an end. They found a world the Legion had not yet touched, and they called on their dwindling powers in a desperate attempt to reach it. Velen and his renegades would name this world Draenor, or "Exiles' Refuge."
The final journey to Draenor was catastrophic. One of the naaru, K'ara, lost touch with its connection to the Light, and Void energies began to consume it. Such was the fate that awaited many of these holy beings. Though Light and Void were opposing forces, they were inexorably linked together. When a naaru was weakened or pushed to the verge of death, its radiant energies would dim. The fading Light would then give way to its polar opposite: the Void. K'ara's final act was to convince the draenei to eject it from the Genedar. This was not easily done. Void energy now coursed through K'ara's body, and instinctively, the being went to war against the other weakening naaru. Their energies clashed within the Genedar, and the chaos of the battle threatened to kill anyone who interfered. Velen stepped in anyway, using the Light to shield the two naaru from their corrupted kin and cast K'ara away from the vessel. For centuries to come, the darkened being would drift in the skies above Shadowmoon Valley. Velen's heroics had saved the draenei, but there were consequences. The battle had injured him and sapped much of his strength, both physically and mentally. His ability to foresee future events became unreliable, and it would take him centuries to fully recover. The other two naaru were too weak to land the Genedar on Draenor safely. The vessel plummeted to the ground, killing D'ore and many of the draenei aboard. When the smoke cleared from the crash site, all that remained of the ship was a crystal mountain. The draenei who survived emerged from the Genedar into a strange new world. The naaru K'ure told them to leave the wrecked ship immediately. The being knew it was decaying much as K'ara had, and it did not want them to be exposed to the Void. Velen and his draenei were truly alone, and as far as they knew, this would be the last world they would ever see. Velen, injured but unwavering, led his people onward. Their surroundings were vibrant but dangerous, a world filled with many mysteries and wonders. Velen's first act was to create an order called the Rangari, survivalist scouts
who would explore their unfamiliar home in search of resources-and threats -that might impact the draenei's future. In time, they found plenty of both.
THE GENEDAR CRASH-LANDS ON DRAENOR
Since leaving Argus, Velen had received constant visions of the future from the naaru and the Holy Light, earning him the name "Prophet." Countless threats had been avoided because he'd seen them coming and guided his people away from the danger. Now the naaru could no longer lead the draenei, and Velen's injuries made his foresight unfocused, drifting between possibilities and certainties. His visions had also grown frightening. When he touched the darkened K'ara, he had seen into the mindset of the chaotic, evil creatures that lurked within the Void. Not only could Velen see possible futures, but now he could see the Void's desired futures. It was difficult to distinguish the visions of true calamity from glimpses into the Void's dreams of a corrupted universe. Velen decided that it would be disastrous if he were the only leader among his people. His judgment was no longer without fault. Velen formed a council of sages that would oversee different aspects of draenei culture. The first of these "exarchs" was Naielle, the leader of the newly forged Rangari. She led her followers by example, spending most of her time in the wilds with the other scouts. The second exarch was charged with guiding draenei engineers-the Artificers-in building armor, weapons, and settlements. Hataaru was tremendously skilled, and he had already learned how to shape Draenor's raw materials. Among his first creations were arkonite crystals. They served as conduits of arcane energy, which brought light and power to draenei society and also allowed them to build constructs to protect their homes from danger. The third exarch, Akama, was placed in charge of the draenei Vindicators. As warriors of the Light, Vindicators defended the draenei from the dark forces that lurked in their new home. The fourth and final exarch was Othaar. The Genedar's naaru were either dead or slowly decaying, but some of their holy energies lingered. The draenei had also recovered D'ore's remains. They did not yet know whether the fallen naaru was dangerous, or exactly how much of it had been consumed in Void energy. It fell to Othaar to study D'ore and its kin, analyze
them, and hopefully learn enough to communicate with the other naaru and draenei beyond Draenor. Othaar became the leader of the Sha'tari, an order dedicated to this cause.
The Rangari scoured Draenor for a place to build a permanent settlement. They discovered a prime location that no other creature had settled, a site protected by mountains and with access to the sea. Unbeknownst to the Rangari, this had once been the ogre city of Goria. Draenor's other societies remembered the elemental rage that had consumed it, and none had any desire to resettle that land. The draenei had no such memories, and thus, no such reluctance. Velen led his people there and established the city of Shattrath, a word meaning "Dwelling of Light" in the draenei's tongue. Artificers labored day and night to erect buildings, crystals, and roadways, laying the foundation for the draenei civilization to grow and expand. As the draenei worked, a strange phenomenon caught their attention. One of the Sha'tari, Maladaar, sensed that something was happening to the souls of draenei who had died in the Genedar's crash. The remains of the naaru D'ore had drifted deeper into a Void state, and they were attracting these spirits. Most shocking of all, once the souls arrived at the naaru, living draenei found that they could communicate with their fallen brethren. Nothing like this had ever happened before in the history of eredar society. Velen immediately directed Maladaar and a group of Sha'tari to move D'ore's remains to a secluded place. They found a location on the outskirts of Terokkar Forest that was a safe distance from all other civilizations. The Sha'tari then built an immense mausoleum to house D'ore. After they had moved the naaru's remains within the tomb city, the draenei spirits followed. The site became known as Auchindoun, "a Home for the Honored Dead," and Maladaar was named as the fifth exarch on the draenei council. He would lead an order called the Auchenai. Maladaar and his followers would be responsible for communing with the draenei dead and protecting their souls from harm.
As Shattrath City flourished, Velen urged the draenei to avoid settling too far outside the stronghold. He did not want to disturb the orc and ogre civilizations in the region. Within a few years, he changed his mind. As the Rangari explored Draenor, they discovered more and more signs that the crash of the Genedar had caused serious harm to the world. The impact had unleashed a mix of arcane, Light, and Void energies that were warping the local flora and fauna. Primals and breakers were emerging from their enclaves, fighting openly with whatever creatures they could find. The plant life on Draenor was far more aggressive than on any world Velen and his people had ever visited, and it seemed dangerous to ignore it. Velen decided that it was the draenei's responsibility to fix what they had broken. Groups of Artificers, Rangari, and Vindicators established outposts and cities across Draenor, linking them to the world's arcane ley lines. The greatest of these new settlements was the Temple of Karabor. Tucked away at the eastern edge of Shadowmoon Valley, it would soon become one of the draenei's holiest and most beautiful sites. Over time, by using arcane and Light energies, the draenei were able to repair the damage done to Draenor. The primals and the breakers quieted within a few decades, and the harm seemed to be contained. This expansion brought the draenei into contact with other races. Velen made it clear to the exarchs that he expected his people to avoid conflict with native creatures. But his hopes of keeping the orcs and the ogres free of any ill effects from the draenei's arrival were quickly dashed. The Shadowmoon orcs had always been sensitive to signs of divine power, and they saw meaning in the movements of celestial bodies. When K'ara's remains appeared in the sky, the clan's mystics called the manifestation the "Dark Star" and worshipped it as a deity. A few bold shaman tried to access K'ara's shadowy power. Touching the
fallen naaru's Void energies shattered their minds. The Shadowmoon soon decided that the Dark Star's power was not meant to be wielded by mortals. Anyone who tried was sharply rebuked, and if they continued, they would be immediately exiled far from Shadowmoon Valley.
The decaying naaru trapped within the Genedar's crystal wreckage also had an effect on orc society. Just as D'ore's remains had begun attracting the souls of fallen draenei, K'ure began attracting the souls of dead orcs. Once the clans discovered this, shaman made frequent pilgrimages to the crystal mountain, which they named Oshu'gun, to speak with their ancestors. Some of the orc spirits, suffused with Light energies that lingered in the Genedar, now had wisdom far beyond what they had known in life. Advice from these ancestors often proved prescient, and clans that obeyed the spirits' words were usually overjoyed at the results. This turn of events deeply troubled the draenei. Though D'ore's remains were emitting Void energies, all that was left of the naaru was a small part of its original form. Yet K'ure was fully intact, and the dark powers bleeding from it seemed incredibly potent. The draenei did not know what the longterm effects of this would mean for the world or the orcs, and the Sha'tari order's quiet missions to study the Genedar yielded no answers. Every action they could think to take would potentially cause disaster. If the orcs were cut off from their ancestors, they might go to war; if K'ure were to suddenly fall deeper into the Void, there was no telling what horror might result. In the end, the draenei did nothing. As they feared, K'ure's Void energies would later have detrimental effects on the orcs. When the draenei had crash-landed on the world, a small society of orcs who dwelled under Nagrand had taken notice. This society was composed of exiles who'd been banished from their clans because they had tapped into the Void and lost themselves to madness during their shamanic rites of passage. For generations, these outcasts had gathered in caves below Nagrand, their faces tattooed with the white skull that marked them as pariahs. The exiles expanded their tunnels under Oshu'gun to investigate the strange newcomers. In time, they tapped into the Void energies that bled
from K'ure and seeped into the ground. Through the study of this power, the outcasts began communing with the void lords. These monstrous entities responded to the orcs, bombarding them with visions of apocalypse and revealing the secrets of using shadow magic. The influx of Void energies would gradually turn the exiles' skin a sickly white, and they would call themselves the Pale. Apart from creating the Pale, K'ure's dark energies had little immediate effect on the orcs. In the decades that followed, some clans engaged in trade with the draenei, but most kept their distance. It was not uncommon for orc scouts-particularly young and curious ones-to survey draenei settlements from afar. Some orcs believed the draenei were divine creatures; others did not. No one considered them to be a real threat. As far as the orcs were concerned, the reclusive draenei were not much more than a passing curiosity. The ogres, however, saw the draenei's isolation as a sign of weakness.
The ogres had been aware of the draenei since the first day they arrived. The blazing ball of fire slamming into the ground had attracted considerable interest, and scouts from Highmaul had kept a close watch on the draenei's expansion across Terokkar Forest. When Shattrath was first built, there was an explosion of anger within Highmaul. The draenei were newcomers, smaller and weaker than ogres, and yet they were bold enough to build a city on the bones of the Gorian Empire's great capital? It was seen as an unforgivable insult. And yet Shattrath's sleek construction and otherworldly defenses gave the ogres pause. Nothing like the draenei's technology had ever been seen on this world. Their weakest apprentices had more refined and effective magical techniques than even the most advanced ogre sorcerers. When a new leader seized control of Highmaul, he declared that he would conquer Shattrath. Imperator Hok'lon, a gifted arcanist himself, believed that the draenei had stolen their power. Perhaps they'd had some skill before, but they had built their city atop Goria. Who knew how much hidden knowledge was left beneath the old capital? It had been the greatest center of Gorian power, the place where all apprentice sorcerers had trained. Hok'lon incited his people to wage war by publicly sneering at the draenei, calling them "usurpers." He promised that Highmaul would become the center of a new, enlightened Gorian Empire once the draenei were slaughtered. The ogres would not even need to rebuild their city. The draenei had already taken care of that. Highmaul's aristocracy threw their support behind Hok'lon, eager to claim the extraordinary new city for themselves. Though the ogre army that marched on Shattrath vastly outnumbered the draenei, it did not matter. The city's defenses easily repelled Highmaul's first attack. There was never an opportunity for a second. As the ogres regrouped, Rangari and Vindicators launched surprise attacks from multiple directions, stabbing deep into the ogres' ranks. Akama led an elite force of holy warriors that included two of his greatest followers:
Maraad and Nobundo. They found and killed Hok'lon and his generals, leaving Highmaul's forces in disarray. Rather than slaughter the rest of the ogres, the draenei immediately called off their attack and returned to Shattrath. Velen then appeared on Shattrath's ramparts, wreathed in the scintillating Light. He issued a single statement, his voice rumbling through the heavens: "Go home, and you will not be harmed." The ogres needed little encouragement. They fled. The grandiose war that was meant to revive the Gorian Empire had fallen after one attack, with an unexpectedly small death toll. The Highmaul ogres never tried a frontal assault on the draenei again.
Before the ogres' attack on Shattrath, the orcs had seen the draenei as mostly harmless. That was no longer the case. Word of the swift resolution to the Highmaul aggression spread quickly. The draenei's command of arcane and holy magics was unlike anything the orcs had ever seen, and that unfamiliarity resulted in suspicion. The gathering of the orc clans at one of that year's Kosh'harg festivals was quite tense. Some clans resolved to avoid all contact with the draenei. Others decided to treat them as enemies, vowing to attack the strangers if they ever strayed into orcish territory. The fact that the draenei had taken care to minimize ogre casualties was seen as a weakness. A few orc chieftains speculated that the draenei hated fighting and would shrink away from a worthy opponent. The Kosh'harg ended with no consensus, just unease. The draenei had never shown aggression toward the orcs, after all. Most clans were content to keep their distance. Yet the Bladewind clan took a different approach. Since they inhabited the area between Terokkar Forest and Nagrand, they knew of the draenei's favorite trade routes and caravan schedules. When a number of caravans went missing on a single day, Velen and the exarchs took notice. The burning remains of the traders were soon discovered. Among the draenei dead were orc corpses bearing Bladewind clan tattoos. It was obvious who had launched these raids. Most distressingly, some of the draenei traders were missing; the orcs had taken prisoners. Many draenei wanted to retaliate. Forcefully. Velen forbade it. He allowed the Rangari to launch covert missions to rescue prisoners, but an offensive campaign against the Bladewind orcs would only lead to calamity. The clan was not large. It would be relatively easy to defeat, but orcs were not known to surrender. The war would not end until nearly all the Bladewinds had died - and then what? Would the other orc clans be cowed? That was not in their nature.
Velen did not want war, but he also knew that the orcs respected bravery in combat. Future caravans were well guarded, often by squads of Vindicators openly displaying weapons that glimmered with the Holy Light. Any orc raiders who confronted the traders were usually defeated. Sometimes caravans fell, and sometimes more prisoners were taken. The Rangari managed to save a number of draenei prisoners, but not all. These few poor souls were forced into slavery for the rest of their lives. Some of them bore children for their masters. Their half-breed offspring were reviled and scorned by both draenei and orc cultures. The Bladewinds soon developed a respect for the Rangari and the Vindicators. Raids only took place on lightly guarded caravans or when the orcs were led by the particularly bold (or foolish).
As the years wore on, a new balance took hold on Draenor between the orcs and the draenei. Blood would be shed on both sides in occasional skirmishes. Yet not all encounters between the two races were violent. An example of this was when two young orcs named Orgrim Doomhammer and Durotan crossed paths with the draenei. One day, both of these youths would become great leaders. One day, both would change the destiny of the orc race in their own ways. Orgrim hailed from the Blackrock clan, and Durotan from the Frostwolf clan. They had met at one of the Kosh'harg festivals. As the clan chieftains had discussed current events and trade agreements, Orgrim and Durotan had challenged each other in feats of strength and willpower. Their rivalry had blossomed into a friendship that would last for many years to come. Though friendship between members of different clans went against longstanding tradition, the Frostwolf and Blackrock elders permitted Orgrim and Durotan to maintain their bond. One summer, the youths met at the border between Frostfire Ridge and Gorgrond. They had been warned not to stray beyond this point, but Orgrim and Durotan were not orcs prone to following the rules. They set out into the thick forests of Terokkar, where they were attacked by an enraged Highmaul ogre. Orgrim and Durotan were strong, but they could not match the ogre's might. The brute descended on the youths, but he never had the chance to kill them. Rangari scouts had been tracking this ogre, who had strayed deep into draenei lands. The Rangari emerged from the woods and felled the brute with their arrows. The draenei hunting party's leader, Restalaan, admired Orgrim's and Durotan's bravery, yet he knew they were in great danger from other ogres who were prowling the forests. He offered a safe haven in the nearby settlement of Telmor.
Orgrim and Durotan were wary of the draenei, but they accepted the offer. They had never been inside a draenei settlement. Few orcs had. They were shocked by the draenei's hospitality, but even more so by the wondrous technology and craftsmanship of Telmor. Orgrim and Durotan's arrival in Telmor was also fortuitous for the draenei. Velen was in the city to meet with Restalaan. After hearing of the two newcomers, he requested an audience with them. Of late, Velen had been experiencing strange dreams of the orcs, in which he saw them united and marching for war. In some of these visions, the Prophet also saw a great shadow slowly creeping over Draenor. Due to his lingering injuries, Velen was not sure whether these premonitions had any truth to them, but he was determined to find out. While meeting with Orgrim and Durotan, Velen observed the two orcs carefully. Yet he did not find any darkness stirring in their hearts. Much to the contrary, the youths seemed proud and honest. Under Velen's orders, Rangari scouts escorted Orgrim and Durotan back to the borders of Gorgrond. Their stay in Telmor had been short, but the two youths had learned much about the draenei. They returned home with tales of the hospitality that had been shown to them, and of the extraordinary sights they had seen. This event would mark one of the last peaceful encounters between orcs and draenei.


For millennia after the draenei fled Argus, Sargeras and his Legion continued their Burning Crusade. Demons laid waste to countless worlds, burning entire civilizations from existence. Yet there was one world that turned the Legion back. Azeroth. Azeroth was an extraordinary place. It contained a nascent titan spirit, one destined to become more powerful than Sargeras himself. The Legion's ruler knew that if it fell to the void lords, Azeroth would become a weapon that not even he could stand against. Sargeras was eager to conquer Azeroth before the void lords shrouded it in darkness. To do so, he launched a massive invasion of the world. Demons of all kinds flooded into Azeroth, slaughtering its inhabitants and inundating the wilds with fel magic. The War of the Ancients had begun. Then the impossible happened. Led by a noble race called the night elves, Azeroth's native creatures overcame the invading Legion and banished it back to the Twisting Nether.
The defeat infuriated Sargeras. He became obsessed with seizing Azeroth at any cost, and he plotted a second invasion. Many challenges faced the Legion's ruler, not the least of which was bringing his demons to the world again. It was no simple task to open portals between the Twisting Nether and the physical universe that were large enough and stable enough for armies to pass through. It required astronomical amounts of energy. In the first invasion, the Legion had harnessed the power of Azeroth's Well of Eternity. This enormous fount of arcane magic allowed the demons to craft a gateway to the Nether. Yet the Well of Eternity was now gone, destroyed by Azeroth's defenders. Finding another way to breach the world was not impossible, but it would take time and great effort. What was more, Sargeras wanted to be certain that when the Legion did invade, it would face no heavy resistance. He wanted Azeroth's inhabitants to be broken before his demons set foot on the world. An idea took shape in Sargeras's mind. He and his Legion would find new weapons that they could use to soften Azeroth's defenders before a proper demonic invasion force arrived. Sargeras ordered his followers to scour the universe for suitable races to corrupt and add to the Legion's ranks. Meanwhile, the fallen titan focused his attention on Azeroth itself. He sought out a powerful individual there, someone who would serve as a vessel to begin the next invasion.
THE SECOND WELL OF ETERNITY Though the Well of Eternity was destroyed, not all of its energies were gone. A night elf named Illidan Stormrage had stolen some of the fount's water. With it, he created a new Well of Eternity. Sargeras and his Legion would eventually learn of its existence, but they would not be able to use this new source of power as easily as they had the first Well of Eternity. The second fount was capped by Nordrassil, a colossal World Tree enchanted to protect the Well's energies.
While the Legion was bolstering its strength for the next invasion of Azeroth, Kil'jaeden the Deceiver tasked a demon named Talgath with hunting the draenei. He visited dozens of worlds that the renegades had momentarily touched, but he was always one step behind his prey. After a series of failed attempts to capture the draenei, Talgath finally found evidence of their whereabouts. When the Genedar crashed on Draenor, the impact had sent waves of holy energy surging through the Twisting Nether. Talgath sensed this influx of power and investigated the strange phenomenon. His anticipation swelled as he realized that these energies had come from the naaru, the same ones who had helped Velen and his renegades escape Argus. For more than a century, Talgath tracked the contrails of holy power, until he reached the lush world of Draenor. He steeled himself for yet another disappointment, expecting to find that the draenei had once again slipped through his fingers. But this time was different. As he observed Draenor, Talgath saw the fledgling draenei civilization. Not only had they settled on the world, but their dimensional fortress lay in ruin. They were trapped. Talgath communed with Kil'jaeden and told him what he had found. The discovery of the draenei greatly pleased the demon lord. He had once been great friends with Velen. When the Prophet and his renegades had fled from Argus, Kil'jaeden saw it as a betrayal of trust, a grave insult that required punishment. At long last, the demon lord could make good his desires. Kil'jaeden commanded his servant to remain hidden and report on what he learned of Draenor. Talgath relayed information about the draenei and their way of life to Kil'jaeden, along with details of the orcs and the world's other indigenous races. Though Kil'jaeden wanted to destroy the draenei outright, he stayed his
hand. Sargeras had specifically tasked him and the Legion's other commanders with finding new races to incorporate into their armies. Perhaps the orcs could serve that purpose. For the time being, Kil'jaeden ordered Talgath to continue watching Draenor and its inhabitants. The demon lord had much yet to learn about the orcs and their customs.
Talgath spent time observing the orcs and their ways. The demon found that the creatures were incredibly resilient, and many were prone to violence. Though he watched all of the clans, he devoted his attention to those that held the most power and influence among their race. These included the Warsong, Blackrock, Bleeding Hollow, Shadowmoon, Thunderlord, and Frostwolf clans. In Nagrand, constant battle with the Highmaul ogres had shaped the Warsongs into fearsome nomads. A warrior named Grommash Hellscream led the clan. The Highmaul outnumbered the Warsongs, but that did not stop the clan's bold chieftain from leading attacks against the ogres. Hellscream's highly mobile wolf riders swarmed across Nagrand's plains, using hit-andrun tactics to raid ogre settlements. Grommash and his people eventually shattered Highmaul's hold on the region, seizing much of it for themselves. They pushed the ogres back within the walls of their stronghold, and the Warsong chieftain became a legend among the clans. This was only the beginning of the Highmaul's woes. The ogres had a long history of enslaving orcs. For entertainment, they forced their captives to fight each other in brutal arenas. One slave known as Kargath led an uprising in Highmaul. He tore off his own hand to escape his chains, and he challenged his fellow slaves to do the same. Those who did joined Kargath as he rampaged through the city and spilled the blood of his masters. Kargath and these former slaves established a new clan called the Shattered Hand, and they settled in the Spires of Arak. Slavery had changed these orcs into a twisted and embittered people who knew only pain and torment. Kargath and his followers adopted bloody traditions of selfdisfigurement and scarification. They attached weapons to the ends of their severed limbs, and Kargath himself earned the name "Bladefist" for starting this practice. North of the Shattered Hand territories lay Gorgrond, home of the
Blackrocks. Their leader, Chieftain Blackhand, commanded enormous respect from orcs across the world. Though he was arrogant and power hungry, he was also a charismatic leader and a great fighter. His mighty soldiers would follow their chieftain to the ends of Draenor without hesitation. The Blackrocks boasted the largest, most organized, and best equipped orcish military in the world. The clan's shaman had perfected the art of using elemental fire to shape blackrock ore, a rare metal found in Gorgrond. The Blackrocks worked their forges day and night, crafting enchanted weaponry and armor that were nearly indestructible. Like the Warsongs, the Blackrocks had long clashed with local ogre populations. By the time Talgath began observing Blackhand and his followers, the orcs had crushed their brutish enemies and driven most of them from Gorgrond. The Bleeding Hollow were much different than other clans. The highly superstitious orcs dwelled in the remote corners of Tanaan Jungle, where they practiced dark rituals. The Bleeding Hollow faced many threats, from botani and genesaur to ogres and arakkoa. These enemies had pushed the clan to the brink of extinction before a new leader came to power: Kilrogg Deadeye. Before becoming chieftain, Kilrogg had undergone a rite of passage to see the future. He gouged out his eye and was granted a vision of his own death. The gruesome ritual did not trouble Kilrogg. He lived his life without fear, for he knew the exact day of his demise.
CHIEFTAIN BLACKHAND MAKES WAR ON THE OGRES Kilrogg murdered his father to take control of the ailing Bleeding Hollow clan. Under his leadership, the orcs stormed through the jungles and eradicated their old enemies. Talgath was intrigued to find that not all clans were so warlike. The Shadowmoon were relatively peaceful orcs. They were a spiritual people who inhabited Shadowmoon Valley, and many of their traditions revolved around shamanic practices. The clan's shaman frequently traveled to the Throne of the Elements to commune with the world's elemental spirits. They also revered the orcs' dead ancestors, calling on them for advice. The wise chieftain Ner'zhul guided the Shadowmoon. He was respected by every clan, a rarity for the fragmented orc race. Ner'zhul acted as an advisor
to all shaman, and he helped foster and maintain the loose bonds shared among the different clans. Then there were the Frostwolves, whom Talgath saw as an enigma of sorts. The clan lived in a rugged corner of the world known as Frostfire Ridge. The Frostwolves were exceptional fighters, but they did not seek to dominate the land. They lived in harmony with it. Chieftain Garad embodied the Frostwolves' noble ideals of family and community. He believed that only by helping each other and standing united could the orcs survive in their harsh environment. Garad pressed his values onto his three sons, but not all of them accepted his teachings. The chieftain's two youngest children, Ga'nar and Durotan, idolized their father and the clan's ancient traditions. The eldest son, Fenris, was different. Fenris abandoned the Frostwolves and joined their rivals, the Thunderlord clan. Unlike the Frostwolves, the Thunderlords valued acts of bravery and valor above all others. They often embarked on dangerous adventures to kill Frostfire's mighty gronn and magnaron. Fenris earned the renown he so craved, and he would eventually become the chieftain of the Thunderlord clan. For a number of months, Talgath continued watching the clans, specifically those that dwelled in Frostfire Ridge. Tensions were increasing between them and the local Bladespire ogres. The demon wanted to see how far the orcs would go to secure peace for themselves.
Highmaul never recovered from the battles with the Warsongs and Kargath's slave uprising. The ogres' hold on Nagrand was broken forever. This turn of events greatly troubled the Bladespire and their leader, Imperator Kelgrok. Ogre influence was waning across Draenor. The imperator was determined to retain control of Frostfire Ridge. Rather than simply shore up the Bladespire's defenses, Kelgrok sought to expand. And he had the perfect weapon to do so. Ever since the fall of the Gorian Empire, the ogre population had remained relatively low. To make up for their lack of numbers, Bladespire sorcerers had conducted cruel experiments to create new creatures whom they could use to fill their labor force. The most promising results came from selective breeding between ogres and enslaved orcs. The children of these forced unions were called mok'nathal. They possessed the strength of ogres and the intelligence of orcs. The Bladespire kept the mok'nathal in chains, and they bred them together to create even more servants. To maintain loyalty from the half-breeds, the ogres threatened to kill entire families if even one of their members rebelled. Imperator Kelgrok unshackled many of the mok'nathal and ordered them to make war on the orcs. They would form the bulk of the Bladespire's army. The Bladespire forces rampaged across Frostfire and seized large tracts of resource-rich land from the orcs. Chieftain Garad called upon the region's two other clans-the Thunderlords and the Whiteclaws-to unite with the Frostwolves against this new threat. Due to Fenris's influence, the Thunderlords rejected Garad's call for unity. They decided to deal with the Bladespire in their own way. Teams of Thunderlord orcs raided ogre settlements in the dead of night, slaughtering young and old alike. Yet the Whiteclaw clan did embrace Garad's request for help. They felt an affinity toward the Frostwolves, with whom they shared many customs and traditions. Garad was declared leader of the Frostwolf and Whiteclaw army. He
named his sons Ga'nar and Durotan as his lieutenants. With a formidable force now under his command, the chieftain struck at the Bladespire. The orcs didn't win any decisive victories, but they did capture a number of mok'nathal and their elder, Leoroxx. When Garad met with Leoroxx, he was surprised by what he learned from his enemy. The Frostwolf chieftain had always assumed that the half-breeds served the ogres willingly. From Leoroxx, he learned of the mok'nathal's cruel treatment at the Bladespire's hands, and the specter of execution that constantly hung over their families. After much discussion, Garad and his prisoner came to an agreement. They would help each other destroy the Bladespire forever. Leoroxx returned to Bladespire Hold and incited open rebellion among the mok'nathal. The half-breeds rose up against their oppressors and set fire to the stronghold. As pillars of smoke billowed into the sky, Garad and his army smashed into Bladespire Hold's outer defenses. The Battle of Bladespire dragged on for a full bloody day before the allied orc and mok'nathal armies drove the ogres from their fortress. In the heart of the burning stronghold, Leoroxx strangled Imperator Kelgrok with the chains that he had worn for so much of his life. The orcs had won, but at great cost. Hundreds of Frostwolves and Whiteclaws had died in battle, including Ga'nar. He had sacrificed his life, helping many young mok'nathal escape the besieged fortress. Ga'nar's death broke his father's heart. Though Durotan remained to carry on the family line, the Frostwolf chieftain would never recover from losing his second son. After the battle, Chieftain Garad offered Leoroxx and his people land in Frostfire to make a new home. The elder mok'nathal declined, knowing the orcs would never truly accept half-breeds. Leoroxx gathered his fellow mok'nathal and settled in a remote corner of Gorgrond. Resources were scarce, but they would be able to live in peace. They disavowed fighting and swore to take up arms only to defend their meager lands from threats.
From Talgath's observations, Kil'jaeden learned much of the orcs. They were a resilient, proud, and mighty race. They were also superstitious creatures who engaged in ancestor worship and honored the world's elemental spirits. Kil'jaeden believed that these strong traditions would make the orcs easy to manipulate. If he could bend them to his will, he would use them to enact vengeance on the draenei before incorporating the orcs into the Legion. Talgath was infuriated when he learned of Kil'jaeden's plans. The renegades were finally in his grasp. He had not endured millennia of hunting the draenei just so the primitive orcs could spill their blood. He demanded that his master reconsider. Kil'jaeden would have normally repaid such insubordination with death, but he understood Talgath's anger. Still, the demon lord would not allow such disobedience to go unpunished. He ordered Talgath to leave Draenor. Kil'jaeden's servant would play no part in the draenei's downfall. With Talgath gone, Kil'jaeden focused on corrupting the orcs. He needed an agent from their race to follow his will, and he carefully searched for someone whom he could sway to his side. Kil'jaeden found many suitable candidates, but none held as much potential as Gul'dan. He'd been born with physical weaknesses into a small clan at the edge of Gorgrond. The superstitious orcs saw Gul'dan's twisted form as an ill omen, and they eventually exiled him. Only the clan's elder shaman took pity on Gul'dan. He told him to seek out the Throne of the Elements in Nagrand, where he might find his purpose in life from the native spirits. At first, Gul'dan rejected the shaman's advice. Years of being treated with disdain had made him bitter and vengeful. But after struggling to survive alone in the wilds, he sought out the Throne of the Elements. Gul'dan reached the holy site a shadow of what he once was-a pitiful orc wasted
away by hunger and pushed to the brink of death. He fell to his knees and cried out to the spirits, proclaiming he would serve them if it meant an end to his suffering. The elements answered, but not in the way Gul'dan had hoped for. The spirits sensed the darkness and fury in the orc's heart, and they rejected him just as his clan had. Gul'dan's sorrow overwhelmed him. Everything in this world had abandoned him. He had nothing. He was nothing. Kil'jaeden reached out to his desperate prey and whispered in his mind. He promised to make Gul'dan so powerful that no one would ever pity or dominate him again. The orc would become like a god, and he would punish all who had wronged him. In exchange for this power, Gul'dan would help the Burning Legion use the orcs as a weapon to destroy the draenei. Gul'dan agreed to this shadow pact. He had no love for his own people, only disdain. Their customs and traditions had caused his suffering. If attaining godhood meant manipulating the orc race, he would not hesitate to do so. Kil'jaeden instructed his new servant in the ways of fel magic. The demon lord knew that these energies would physically change the orc or even draw the draenei's attention, so he took steps to hide Gul'dan's new abilities. Kil'jaeden taught the orc how to mask his powers, and he ordered him to use fel magic only when absolutely necessary. Gul'dan took to the volatile power faster than expected. He reveled in the destructive might at his fingertips. So was born the first orc warlock.
Kil'jaeden had an agent among the orcs to do his bidding, but the conditions were not yet right to turn them against the draenei. He needed the entire orc race to be desperate and plagued by dark emotions, so much so that they would be easy to unite as a single force. From what Gul'dan told him of Draenor's past, Kil'jaeden learned of a time when the orcs had joined as one. Long ago, ogres had sought to dominate the Throne of the Elements. Their meddling had thrown the elemental spirits into turmoil, leading to hardship. Fearing calamity, the orcs had banded together to fight the ogres. If Kil'jaeden could re-create that elemental upheaval, perhaps the clans would repeat history. Kil'jaeden guided Gul'dan, helping the orc inundate the Throne of the Elements with fel magic. Just as planned, the corruptive power began to weaken the world's native spirits. Draenor's Elemental Furies-Gordawg, Aborius, Kalandrios, and Incineratus-materialized to stop Gul'dan. Yet they had never faced a warlock before. The orc called on his strange magics to draw the life from the Furies, crippling their strength. He nearly destroyed them before they fled before his wrath. It was the first time in Gul'dan's life that he had dominated other living creatures. The victory was intoxicating. Gul'dan's fel magic threw the elements into disarray. As the seasons passed, long droughts were followed by heavy rain. Floods devastated arid regions in Gorgrond and parts of Nagrand. Freak snowstorms blanketed portions of Tanaan Jungle and Terokkar Forest in ice. Rivers and streams dried up, which caused game like clefthoof and talbuk to die by the thousands. Disease, water scarcity, and the loss of food sources led to immense suffering among the orcs. The shaman could offer no relief. The elemental spirits were tormented by fel energy, and they rarely communicated with the orcs anymore. Gul'dan also used his magic to spread the red pox among the clans. This outbreak was the worst in orcish history. Months passed, and hundreds
perished from the virulent plague. Many of the victims contracted the pox during one of the orcs' Kosh'harg festivals in Nagrand. Led by Chieftain Ner'zhul, the clans met to discuss the current elemental troubles. As the Kosh'harg ended and the orcs began their journeys home, some displayed signs of the pox. The afflicted included Chieftain Garad of the Frostwolf clan. Ner'zhul feared that these orcs would spread the pox to new victims. He urged Garad and the other plague bearers to remain in Nagrand. They would construct a new village to house the affected and keep them away from greater orc society. Though the thought of not returning home filled Garad with great sorrow, he saw the wisdom in Ner'zhul's words. The last thing the Frostwolf chieftain wished for was to spread the pox to his family and clan members. Garad remained in Nagrand, and he took charge over his fellow plague victims. Durotan volunteered to stay behind with his father, but Garad gave him other orders. The young Frostwolf was the sole remaining heir to the clan. Garad convinced Durotan to return home and look after their people for the time being. It was the last time Durotan would ever see his father. In a matter of weeks, the red pox consumed Garad. Though he had led the other pox victims for only a short time, he had earned their eternal respect. They named their settlement Garadar in his honor.
Violence and desperation were spreading among the clans. Kil'jaeden sensed that it was almost time to unite the orcs, but he needed a public figure to do so. Gul'dan, for all his talents, could not inspire his people or lead them by example. The demon lord commanded his servant to ally with someone who could. But first, Gul'dan would need to exterminate anyone who knew of his past. The hooded warlock returned to his old clan. He engulfed the settlement in fel fire, burning every single orc within to ash. When the inferno finally died down, nothing remained. No one would ever know of Gul'dan's true history. With his past erased, he set out for the Shadowmoon clan. Its wise shaman commanded respect from all orcs. One of them would serve as the Legion's perfect pawn. Gul'dan was careful to hide his fel powers, never revealing that he was a warlock. He told the Shadowmoon that ogres had destroyed his village and killed everyone except him. Though it was uncommon for a clan to bring outsiders into its fold, the Shadowmoon took pity on Gul'dan and accepted him. The newcomer carefully observed the clan's elder shaman to learn which one would be the easiest to sway. After much consideration, he chose the clan's charismatic yet troubled chieftain, Ner'zhul. Ner'zhul was a dedicated and forthright leader. He also had a penchant for dogged persistence. Once he had a goal in mind, he would pursue it obsessively until he succeeded. This trait would serve Gul'dan and the Legion well. But far more important were Ner'zhul's inner turmoil and sorrow. Years ago, the shaman's beloved mate, Rulkan, had passed away. Ner'zhul had come to terms with her death, but the recent elemental troubles that plagued Draenor had awakened old wounds. He had always found peace through communing with the elemental spirits, but now they were silent. Ner'zhul began dwelling on memories of Rulkan, and his grief became just as raw and crushing as it had
been when he'd first lost her. Gul'dan preyed on Ner'zhul's inner darkness. He told the elder shaman of his own troubles, of the family and friends he had lost at his village. In time, Gul'dan won Ner'zhul's friendship and trust. He even convinced the elder to accept him as his shamanic apprentice. Through Gul'dan, Kil'jaeden had access to a public figure whom he could bend to his will. As the demon lord began to twist Ner'zhul's thoughts, he sent Gul'dan on another task. The orcs were desperate and agitated, and now they needed to see the draenei as their enemies. Gul'dan would make it so.
To incite conflict between the orcs and the draenei, Gul'dan turned to the Bladewind clan. Its largest village was at the edge of Terokkar Forest, near the draenei capital, Shattrath. For many decades, tensions had simmered between this community of Bladewinds and its neighbors. The orcs sometimes ransacked draenei caravans and enslaved or killed anyone who could not escape. When the elemental spirits became erratic, the Bladewinds suffered greatly. Their water sources went dry, and the wild game they hunted died off. The red pox also decimated the clan. Nearly seventy percent of the Bladewinds succumbed to the disease. The Bladewinds were desperate, and that made them vulnerable. Gul'dan approached the Bladewind village as a representative of the Shadowmoon. After many long discussions with the orcs, he convinced them that the draenei were responsible for the red pox and the world's elemental woes. Gul'dan assured the Bladewinds that if they were to spill draenei blood, such an act would appease the elemental spirits. Like all orcs, the Bladewinds held the Shadowmoon shaman in high regard. They had no reason to question Gul'dan. They embraced his advice, eager to change their fortunes. Lightly armed Bladewind raiding parties soon gathered and assaulted draenei caravans in greater numbers than ever before. The orcs murdered dozens of innocents and took just as many prisoners. One of these captives was Leran, the sister of a Vindicator named Maraad. When Maraad learned that his sister had gone missing, he urged the draenei leadership to take action. Many other Vindicators also called for something to be done. The Bladewinds had preyed on their traders for too long. It was time to eliminate the threat once and for all. Velen appealed for calm. Something did not sit right with the Prophet. In the long years since the Genedar's crash, he had slowly regained his ability to see the future, but his visions remained unreliable. Strange images bombarded his thoughts, many of them indecipherable.
Yet there were a few that concerned him. Around the time of the Bladewind attacks, he saw visions of an immense shadow looming over the orcs, guiding their actions. Velen and the exarchs sent the Rangari to report on the Bladewinds' activities and discern whether some unseen power was at work behind their violent outburst. The draenei scouts found no evidence that the orcs were being manipulated, but they did return with horrific stories. The Bladewinds were slaughtering their prisoners in gruesome rituals to appease the elements. Only a few captives had not yet suffered this grim fate, and Leran was among them. Maraad could stand by no longer, not when there was still a chance to save his sister. He made an impassioned plea to Velen and the exarchs to launch an offensive against the orcs. Reluctantly, the draenei leadership agreed. Led by Maraad, a small force of Vindicators and Rangari stormed the Bladewind village. By the time they reached the settlement, Leran and the other captives were dead. The sight of his sister's mutilated body enraged Maraad, and he rampaged through the village. From a distance, Gul'dan watched as violence engulfed the Bladewind settlement. The orcs were so desperate to appease the elements that they fought until nearly every single one was dead. A few survivors fled east toward Shadowmoon Valley, but they never reached their destination. Gul'dan murdered the survivors so that they could never tell of what had truly happened in Terokkar Forest. Only the warlock's version of events would survive.
MARAAD DISCOVERS HIS SISTER IN THE BLADEWIND VILLAGE After returning to the Shadowmoon clan, Gul'dan recounted the atrocity as he saw it. The draenei had launched an unprovoked slaughter against the Bladewinds. They had murdered male and female, young and old. Word of the bloodshed spread throughout the clans. The seeds of hatred and suspicion toward the draenei took root.
As Gul'dan was orchestrating the attack against the Bladewinds, Kil'jaeden preyed on Ner'zhul's emotions. He appeared in the orc's dreams as the spirit of his beloved mate, Rulkan. This false apparition told Ner'zhul that the recent flare of red pox and the elemental turmoil were all the work of the draenei. The reclusive race sought to eradicate the orcs. Ner'zhul was initially wary of Rulkan's dire proclamation. Conflicts between orcs and draenei were not unheard of, but they were rare. Ner'zhul had never known the creatures to be warlike. When Gul'dan arrived with news of the Bladewind atrocity, Ner'zhul changed his mind. Rulkan had been right. The draenei were not what they seemed. Rulkan's spirit pressed Ner'zhul. She told the orc that the only way to save his people was to make war on the draenei. Yet the clans could never accomplish such a feat in their current state. They needed to unite as a single army as they had centuries ago, when the Gorian Empire had threatened their existence. Rulkan convinced Ner'zhul that he was destined to be the savior of the orcs. No one else had the wisdom to lead the clans as one. Ner'zhul revealed to his clan what he had learned from Rulkan. The superstitious orcs rarely went against the advice of important ancestral spirits. Rulkan's warning was taken as truth. The Shadowmoon lent their support to Ner'zhul, Gul'dan the most vocal among them. Ner'zhul sent an urgent summons to the other clans. They were to meet at Oshu'gun, where the shaman would reveal ill omens he had received from the ancestors. In preparation for this event, Kil'jaeden exerted his power over Oshu'gun, preventing any orcs from communing with the real ancestral spirits within the crystal mountain. He also reached out to the minds of elder shaman across Draenor. Just as he had done with Ner'zhul, he took on the guise of trusted ancestral spirits and warned the orcs of the draenei's violent intentions.
Over a number of weeks, the orc chieftains gradually arrived at Oshu'gun. Grommash Hellscream, Kilrogg Deadeye, Kargath Bladefist, Blackhand, Fenris, and other famed leaders took their places in the crystal mountain's shadow. The Frostwolf chieftain, Durotan, was there as well. He had come with his mate, Draka, and his clan's elder shaman, Drek'Thar. For Durotan, the meeting at Oshu'gun was a rare opportunity to speak with his old friend Orgrim Doomhammer, who had become Chieftain Blackhand's second-incommand. In recent years, clan responsibilities had prevented them from meeting regularly. As Durotan and Orgrim rekindled their bond, the elder shaman Ner'zhul finally appeared to address the assembled orcs. He told them of Rulkan's prophetic warning about the future and of other unsettling things he had learned. The draenei were responsible for the elemental unease and the red pox outbreak. Their slaughter of the Bladewind clan's main settlement was only a precursor, a sign of more death to come. The draenei sought to annihilate all orcs. Yet there was still hope to avert doom. If the clans put aside their differences and joined forces, they could destroy the draenei and save the world. Ner'zhul knew this was much to ask of the orcs, a race unaccustomed to unification. He gave the chieftains a full day and night to consider his words. The orcs debated the elder shaman's proposal deep into the night. Warmongering chieftains like Grommash, Blackhand, and Kargath supported unification. Ever since news of the Bladewind massacre had reached them, they had become wary of the draenei. Yet others were not so eager for bloodshed. One of the most outspoken critics of war was Chieftain Zagrel of the Whiteclaw clan. He did not believe slaughtering the draenei would make life better. On the contrary, it might anger the elements even more. Durotan was of a similar opinion. Years ago, he and Orgrim had crossed
paths with the draenei and taken shelter in one of their cities. The orcs had even met and spoken with their mysterious leader, Velen. Would those same peaceful creatures make war on the orcs? What did they hope to gain by doing so? Had their earlier hospitality merely been a ruse to learn more about his race? Though he felt conflicted, Durotan was in no position to question the ancestral spirits' wisdom. If they saw the draenei as a threat, so it was. Other shaman, including Drek'Thar, revealed that they, too, had received visions from the ancestors that confirmed Ner'zhul's claims. As discussion continued, Gul'dan stalked among the clan leaders. He knew that the other orcs considered him a weakling due to his physical ailments, and he used that to his advantage. He openly championed Ner'zhul's cause, and he welcomed the prospect of war. In doing so, Gul'dan made the choice of uniting a matter of honor. If even a wretch like him was willing to fight and die for the clans, then anyone who rejected unity would be seen as a coward. Gul'dan's manipulations won many of the orcs to Ner'zhul's side, but not everyone. He took note of Zagrel and others who stubbornly opposed unity. He would not forget their names. At dawn, the orcs came together to cast their votes. Nearly every chieftain agreed to unite. From that day forward, they would be known as the Horde.
THE DOOMHAMMER PROPHECY Orgrim bore a weapon known as the Doomhammer, which had been passed down through his family for generations. An ancient prophecy was associated with this legendary artifact. It was said that the last of the Doomhammer line would use it to bring salvation and then doom to the orcs. Afterward, the
weapon would pass into the hands of an orc not of the Blackrock clan. This new wielder would then use the Doomhammer for a cause of justice.
In the months after the Horde's formation, the clans rallied their warriors and began sporadic attacks against draenei hunting parties. News of these battles quickly reached Velen and the Council of Exarchs. The draenei leadership was puzzled by the sudden flare of bloodshed, but it did not come as a complete surprise. Velen and his followers assumed that the elemental turmoil was agitating the orcs, driving them to violence. After all, that was what had happened with the Bladewind clan. The misguided orcs had sacrificed draenei captives in the hopes of appeasing the elements. At Velen's behest, draenei emissaries tried to make contact with the clans. All attempts to do so were either ignored or met with open hostility. When Rangari scouts reported that the orc clans were uniting into a single army, Velen and the exarchs knew the time for diplomacy had passed. They would need to defend themselves against the battle-hungry orcs. Rather than launch offensives at the orcs, the draenei leadership decided to defend their holdings. The draenei did not yet know that the Burning Legion was manipulating the clans. Velen and the exarchs considered the orcs victims of the world's natural disasters and elemental upheaval, just like every other living creature on Draenor. Exarch Akama, leader of the Vindicators, was charged with organizing the defenses. He dispatched his followers to different draenei settlements across the world. Meanwhile, Artificers constructed new defenses in major cities such as the Temple of Karabor and Shattrath. Velen himself occupied his time with unraveling what was causing the elemental turmoil. The thought had crossed his mind that the Legion might be responsible, but he had found no evidence of demons on Draenor. Nonetheless, Velen kept his attention on the stars in the event that the Legion did appear. He wouldn't realize until it was too late that the demons already had a presence on the world.
Ner'zhul watched the war against the draenei unfold with growing apprehension. He had followed Rulkan's advice, but what good had come of it thus far? The orcs were devolving into a bloodthirsty people. Of even greater concern was the state of the elements. After the attacks on the draenei began, the world's elemental spirits had gone completely silent. Kil'jaeden sensed Ner'zhul's anxiety, and he acted to retain his hold on the shaman. One night, the false visage of Rulkan again graced Ner'zhul's dreams. The spirit told the shaman of powerful beings who could help the orcs triumph over the draenei and bring balance to the world. Ner'zhul urged Rulkan to call on these potential allies. The next night, one of these beings made contact. Kil'jaeden appeared to Ner'zhul in the form of a radiant elemental entity. He told Ner'zhul to push the Horde to victory before the draenei could muster a defense. Kil'jaeden promised that in doing so, Ner'zhul would please the elements. Though Ner'zhul was initially in awe of this new benefactor, his unease deepened. Kil'jaeden was eager to annihilate the draenei, and he wanted the orcs to slaughter their victims without mercy. The benefactor seemed particularly obsessed with killing the one known as Velen. Ner'zhul had never before communed with a spirit who was so violent. Also, ever since Kil'jaeden had begun speaking with him, Rulkan had disappeared. Ner'zhul needed her guidance now more than ever. He secretly embarked on a journey to Oshu'gun, hoping to reestablish contact with his dead mate and glean advice from the other ancestral spirits. Unbeknownst to Ner'zhul, Kil'jaeden was aware of his plans. The elder shaman was not the leader the demon lord had hoped he would be. Kil'jaeden commanded Gul'dan to gather allies who could help him control the Shadowmoon clan, since they could no longer rely on Ner'zhul. Gul'dan met with a young but highly respected Shadowmoon shaman named Teron'gor. To win the orc to his side, the warlock showed him the might of fel magic, which he claimed was a higher form of shamanism.
Teron'gor had spent too long trying and failing to call on the elements for aid. After experiencing fel magic for the first time, he knew he'd found a means to make a difference in the world, a means to help his troubled race. Teron'gor was only the first Shadowmoon shaman to become a warlock. Slowly, Gul'dan won other shaman to his side. Whatever noble intentions these orcs once had faded with the influx of fel energy. The corruptive magic twisted their thoughts and darkened their hearts. They became loyal to Gul'dan alone.
As Gul'dan trained his warlocks, Ner'zhul reached Oshu'gun. He called out to the ancestors, his force of will so strong that he broke through the unseen barriers that Kil'jaeden had placed around the sacred mountain. A storm of ethereal voices howled in the shaman's mind. Among them was his mate, Rulkan. This was not the guise assumed by Kil'jaeden. It was the real Rulkan. The spirit revealed that Ner'zhul had been used. The draenei were not the enemy. Kil'jaeden was. He was not concerned with saving the orcs. His goal was to corrupt them. With Gul'dan's help, Kil'jaeden had coerced Ner'zhul into forming the Horde and igniting war against the innocent draenei. Rulkan and the other ancestral spirits then turned their backs on Ner'zhul. Their silent condemnation crushed the elder shaman, for he knew that there was nothing he could ever do to win back their favor. For the spiritual orcs, such a fate was worse than death. Shame flooded through Ner'zhul. The ancestors were right to disavow him. He had been a fool, delivering the orcs into the hands of evil without even realizing it. His head bowed and his heart heavy, he skulked back to Shadowmoon Valley to decide what he would do in the days ahead. At the very least, he believed he could find ways to sabotage whatever Gul'dan and Kil'jaeden planned for the orcs. He would never have that chance. Before the chieftain reached Shadowmoon Valley, Gul'dan and his new followers apprehended him. Many of the warlocks called for Ner'zhul's death, but Gul'dan did not indulge them. Kil'jaeden had given his servant specific orders regarding the elder shaman. The demon lord wanted Ner'zhul to watch what would become of the orc race. Kil'jaeden also had practical reasons for keeping the elder shaman alive. Ner'zhul had been the one to lobby for war against the draenei. If he suddenly disappeared, it would raise suspicion among the other clans. In the weeks and months to come, Gul'dan and his warlocks would constantly abuse Ner'zhul and treat him as little more than a slave. The elder shaman feared death, and he became too weak and timid to disobey his
masters. He would gradually fade from the public eye, and his usurpers would become the voice of the Shadowmoon clan.
While Gul'dan betrayed Ner'zhul, the orcs continued their war against the draenei. The clans crushed small outposts across the world, but they were not as successful with seizing larger settlements. The draenei's defenses were mighty, and their armies worked in unison. The orcs were quite the opposite. Rival chieftains like Blackhand and Grommash Hellscream often argued over battle tactics. These disagreements ignited fighting between the clans. They were a Horde in name only. Kil'jaeden was well aware of this. He had watched the war unfold with growing displeasure. Gul'dan yearned to take Ner'zhul's place and control the Horde, but the demon lord denied him the opportunity. As useful as the warlock was, he couldn't serve as a leader. His strength lay in subterfuge and manipulation-activities best performed in the shadows. The orcs needed a true leader. They needed a warchief. Kil'jaeden's voice thundered in Gul'dan's mind. He commanded the orc to find another leader for the Horde. Without one, the clans were doomed to crumble and fall to the draenei. Though Gul'dan was furious that his master would not allow him to rule over the Horde, he obeyed. The warlock's lust for power was second only to his fear of Kil'jaeden. Gul'dan knew of only one orc with the strength and confidence to exert control over the Horde: Chieftain Blackhand. Of all the clans, his Blackrocks had been the most successful against the draenei. If they led the Horde, they could impose their strict military discipline on the other orcs. The Blackrocks could also use their elemental forges to arm the clans and create massive war machines to destroy the draenei's defenses. Gul'dan met with Blackhand and urged him to take up the mantle of warchief. If he did, the warlock promised to grant his clan otherworldly strength. Not only would Blackhand's shaman wield power again, but his soldiers would become mightier than those of the other clans. Blackhand himself would be remembered as the greatest orc leader who had ever lived. The warlock knew it would take more than promises to win Blackhand's
support. Gul'dan trained some of the Blackrock clan's shaman in the ways of fel magic. He also taught these new initiates how to magically increase the number of soldiers in their clan. The warlocks flooded adolescent orcs with fel power. The influx of magic caused the orcs to grow rapidly and gave them the strength of adult warriors. But another consequence was the psychological effect this technique had. The fel energies warped the young orcs' minds and left them prone to sudden outbursts of violence. Regardless of the drawbacks, Blackhand was astounded by the results. He ordered the warlocks to transform his young sons, Dal'rend and Maim, into "proper soldiers." Seeing Gul'dan as a useful ally, Blackhand agreed to lead the Horde. The warlock vowed to create a clandestine order to help them watch over the orcs and maintain control. This group would be known as the Shadow Council, and Blackhand would be one of its members. What Gul'dan did not reveal was that his trusted Shadowmoon warlocks would form the inner circle of this secretive order, and they would owe their loyalty to him and him alone. Blackhand's inclusion in the Shadow Council was merely a tactic used by Gul'dan to trick the warchief into thinking he would hold authority over all aspects of the Horde. Distrust festered between Gul'dan and Blackhand, and for good reason. They saw each other as a means to an end. Gul'dan intended to use Blackhand as a puppet ruler. Through the Shadow Council, the warlock would control the Horde and its destiny. Meanwhile, Blackhand was no fool, and he assumed Gul'dan would seek power for himself. He was confident he would not be used by the warlock. To the contrary, he would use Gul'dan to secure his place in orcish history.
While Blackhand renewed the orcs' offensive against the draenei, Gul'dan formed his Shadow Council. Its initial members were the first Shadowmoon warlocks, including Teron'gor. Individuals from other clans also joined the order. They were sworn to secrecy and warned not to betray the Shadow Council's existence or purpose to anyone. Gul'dan inducted more than just orcs into the secret order. He sought out powerful individuals across Draenor. The two who would prove most effective were Garona and Cho'gall. Garona hailed from the Bladewind clan. Her father had been a great orc warrior, and her mother had been a draenei prisoner. Garona was not the first half-breed born into the clan, but she was one of the few who survived past childhood. Years of abuse had forged Garona into a ferocious fighter. Apart from natural physical strength, she also possessed a keen intelligence and a gift with tongues. She had mastered the draenei's language from other Bladewind captives, and her clan had often used her as an interpreter. After the draenei destroyed the main Bladewind village, Garona fled into the wilds of Terokkar. She had worked her way east before running across the Shadow Council. While some of the warlocks viewed Garona as an oddity, Gul'dan saw great potential in her. Gul'dan sympathized with Garona to win her trust-he knew well the pains of living as an outcast. Once the half-breed put down her guard, the Shadow Council struck. Gul'dan and his warlocks called upon their dark power to ensorcell Garona and use her as an assassin. Cho'gall served a much different role than Garona. As a two-headed ogre, Cho'gall was treated as an omen of good fortune. He had lived a life of privilege in Highmaul, where he tutored under the most talented ogre sorcerers. Cho'gall had a natural affinity to the arcane arts. He gained an immense following among Highmaul's common ogres, but not among the city's aristocracy. Cho'gall's arrogance and lust for power put him at odds with the ruling elite. High-ranking ogres feared that his growing popularity would allow him
to seize control of the city. To prevent that, the aristocracy tried to assassinate Cho'gall. The ogre mage narrowly survived the attempt on his life, and he fled from Highmaul.
THE NECROLYTES With Kil'jaeden's help, Gul'dan also formed a group of orcs called necrolytes. They dedicated themselves to learning the dark art of necromancy. Through it, they would be able to spread plagues to the draenei and raise the dead to fight at the Horde's side.
Cho'gall thirsted for vengeance, but he knew it would not come unless he acquired more power. As he searched the world for knowledge and weapons, he came across the Shadow Council and its fel magics. Gul'dan was intrigued by Cho'gall's unfettered confidence and insatiable lust for power. He made the ogre mage his foremost apprentice, and he taught him the secrets of fel magic and told him of the Burning Legion's existence. Though Cho'gall pledged his loyalties to Gul'dan, he was prepared to break them at any time. The ogre mage wanted only power, and he was not interested in the ideologies Gul'dan spouted concerning demons and the Legion. The moment Gul'dan and the Shadow Council ceased being useful, Cho'gall was prepared to turn his back on them.
Though Gul'dan had won Blackhand's support, he knew the other clans would not accept the Blackrock chieftain as their warchief. Not yet. He dispatched his Shadow Council agents to the orcish territories, spreading word of Blackhand's mighty deeds. They claimed that his shaman had discovered new power and tapped into a force even greater than the elements. Many orcs grew intrigued by these mysterious stories, and they looked upon Blackhand with awe. During their journeys, the Shadow Council agents also spied on the clans. They took note of those orcs who opposed the Horde, and they relayed this information back to Gul'dan. There was one orc in particular who drew the warlock's ire: Chieftain Zagrel of the Whiteclaw clan. He had called on the clans to end their pointless war with the draenei and focus their attention on shamanic rituals. Zagrel believed that only through dedicated worship and adherence to old traditions could the orcs rekindle their relationship with the elemental spirits. If he were given enough time, Gul'dan feared that Zagrel could win the support of orcs who questioned the Horde-orcs like Chieftain Durotan and his Frostwolves. The warlock would need to deal with the Whiteclaws' troublesome leader quickly, and he had the perfect weapon. Gul'dan ordered Garona to strike down Chieftain Zagrel. The ensorcelled half-orc could not resist his commands. As silent as a shadow, she slipped into the Whiteclaws' encampment and stabbed Zagrel through the heart. None of his clan would ever know she'd been there. After their leader's untimely death, inner turmoil crippled the clan as Zagrel's brothers and sons battled for the title of chieftain. The Whiteclaws would endure, but they would never be as strong as they had once been.
THE SHADOW COUNCIL LORDS OVER NER'ZHUL Chieftain Durotan was already growing wary of the war against the draenei. Zagrel's demise only deepened his unease. It was not a mere coincidence that the Horde's most vocal opponent had died. Yet Durotan had no proof of who had murdered the Whiteclaw chieftain. Had it been one of his power-hungry kin, or had it been the work of some other, unseen force?
With Zagrel eliminated and respect for the Blackrock clan on the rise, Gul'dan called a meeting of the chieftains and their shaman at Oshu'gun. The time had come to nominate Blackhand as the Horde's leader, but the warlock had one last ploy to secure support for the new warchief. Gul'dan preyed on the fears of the shaman at Oshu'gun. They had begged and groveled to the elements for years to no avail. Now they needed to face the harsh truth: the world's feckless spirits had abandoned the orcs. Yet Gul'dan said there was still hope for the shaman. He proclaimed that the Blackrocks had restored their strength with a glorious new power. Its name was fel magic, and it was the orcs' only hope of saving themselves from the draenei. Gul'dan claimed that benevolent beings had taught the Blackrocks how to wield this magic. They were eager to secure victory for the orcs. Yet Gul'dan never revealed the name Kil'jaeden to the clans, nor did he speak of demons. Not even Blackhand knew about the Burning Legion. Only Gul'dan's most loyal Shadow Council agents were aware of the full truth. The Blackrock warlocks demonstrated their magics on captive draenei, siphoning the prisoners' life essence and burning them from the inside out. Having been powerless for so long, the shaman pleaded with the Blackrocks to share the secrets of their fel might. Even Drek'Thar of the Frostwolves beseeched Durotan for permission to learn this magic. Though plagued with suspicion about fel magic and its seemingly corruptive properties, the chieftain gave his blessing to Drek'Thar. To deny his shaman such power would be to put the Frostwolf clan in a place of weakness. Durotan would not allow that to happen. Drek'Thar was only one of many shaman to embrace fel magic. Orcs from all clans tutored under Blackrock warlocks. It was just as Gul'dan had planned. The Blackrocks and their chieftain were seen as the masters of fel magic, and they were treated with immense reverence.
As the shaman basked in the strength of fel magic, Gul'dan addressed the orcs once again. He warned that the draenei were mobilizing their defenses. If the clans did not work together, they would surely lose the war, even with fel magic at their command. What the orcs needed was a single leader to oversee military operations-a warchief to command the chieftains. And who would be better to fill such a role than Blackhand, who had led his clan to victory after victory against the draenei? Some chieftains saw Blackhand as a rival, but none could deny his power. He held the secrets of fel magic. He had also transformed his clan into an unstoppable war machine. If the chieftains named Blackhand their leader, perhaps he could do the same for their clans. In the end, the vote was unanimous. Durotan himself begrudgingly cast his lot with Blackhand, whom he saw as a tyrant. The Frostwolf chieftain feared that if he were the only voice of dissent, he and his clan would face dire consequences from the Blackrocks. The Horde now had a fierce and unbending leader: Warchief Blackhand. Under his guidance, the orcs would no longer fight in disarray. They would strike with purpose and precision. They would grind the draenei to dust and sweep their remains from the world. For the ancestors. For the clans. For the Horde.
Warchief Blackhand set out to unify the clans and forge the Horde into a proper fighting force. He ordered his Blackrock masons to construct a new capital in western Tanaan Jungle. This imposing stronghold would become known as the Citadel. It would act as neutral ground for the clans, a place where chieftains could meet and strategize about battles to come. The Citadel would also house the Horde's warlocks. Within the fortress, they could hone their abilities and tutor apprentices in the ways of fel magic. Gul'dan and his Shadow Council would use the Citadel as their new headquarters. Very few orcs would know of this, not even warlocks outside of the order. The Shadow Council would blend in with the stronghold's other inhabitants, secretly watching over them and reporting all that they saw to Gul'dan. As masons laid the Citadel's foundations, Blackhand instituted new rules to structure the Horde. Thus far, the clans had launched attacks against the draenei with reckless abandon. Blackhand would not stand for such disorder in his ranks. He knew the strengths and weaknesses of the clans, and he gave them each a specific role in the Horde. The smallest and most mobile clans would act as scouts, raiders, and auxiliary forces that could quickly move from one region of the world to another. These clans included the Bleeding Hollow, the Dragonmaw, the Shattered Hand, the Thunderlords, the Shadowmoon, and the Bonechewers. Blackhand also formed a new clan called the Black Tooth Grin. Composed of soldiers handpicked by the warchief himself, it would serve as the scouting arm of the Blackrock clan. The rest of the clans made up the Horde's main fighting force. They would lead direct assaults on draenei settlements, and they would form the backbone of the orcish army. Chief among these clans were the mighty Blackrocks, Warsongs, and Frostwolves. At first, not all clans accepted Blackhand's orders willingly. Many orcs bristled at the thought of an outsider commanding them in battle, even one who bore the title of warchief. Blackhand won the support of some orcs with
offers of power, but more often than not, he relied on violence to secure their obedience. The new warchief was a tyrant, and he did not accept insubordination. Not from his own clan. Not from any member of the Horde. Blackhand publicly executed anyone foolish enough to speak out against him. He threatened entire clans with annihilation should they try to resist his will. With the Blackrock clan at his disposal, the warchief had the power and means to make good such threats. Begrudgingly or not, the clans gradually accepted Blackhand's rule and settled into their roles in the Horde. To maintain order and discipline in his armies, Blackhand surrounded himself with mighty lieutenants. The greatest of them were Eitrigg, Orgrim Doomhammer, and Varok Saurfang. Each of these orcs would have made a successful chieftain in his own right. Orgrim and the other lieutenants oversaw the Blackrock war machine as it churned to life. Smiths slaved away at their forges in Gorgrond day and night. Plumes of thick smoke blotted out the sun. The Blackrocks crafted thousands of new weapons, armor, and siege engines for the clans.
For Warchief Blackhand, armaments were only one part of his plan to strengthen the Horde. To increase the number of soldiers at his disposal, the warchief offered ogres and mok'nathal a place in his armies. He also sent his most powerful warlocks to the other orc clans. They would use their fel magics to imbue adolescents with the strength and fury of adults. Nearly all of the orc chieftains embraced this new technique, seeing it as a way to bolster their clans' forces. Durotan was the exception. The thought of subjecting young Frostwolves to the warlocks' strange magics unsettled him, but he had no choice. Blackhand had made it clear that anyone who resisted his command would suffer, as would their entire clan. Durotan placed the safety and security of the Frostwolves above all else. Before his eyes, the Blackrock warlocks flooded his clan's youths with their green magic, warping them into hulking, bloodthirsty warriors. This brutal empowerment technique was not the only thing that troubled Durotan. The rampant use of fel magic was changing the orcs. Their brown skin was becoming splotchy and green. Though Durotan didn't know the exact cause, he suspected that the warlocks' magics were to blame. The shift in skin color was a dire sign. It only affirmed his belief that the power wielded by the orcs had sinister origins. The rest of the orcs were not troubled by this transformation. If a change in skin color was the price they had to pay for fel magic, so be it.
While the Horde was rising, the Pale flourished in catacombs beneath Nagrand. Generations ago, this society of exiles had tapped into the Void energies emanating from K'ure, the decaying naaru contained within Oshu'gun. Their dark power rivaled even fel magic in potency. Rumors of the Pale and their otherworldly abilities eventually reached Gul'dan. Though the warlock paid little heed to the stories, Kil'jaeden was intrigued. The demon lord pressed Gul'dan to ensure victory over the draenei at any cost. That meant investigating the Pale and determining whether their magic could strengthen the Horde. Gul'dan sent his apprentice Cho'gall to learn more about the Pale. If the exiles proved as mighty as the rumors claimed, he commanded the ogre mage to bring them into the Horde. Cho'gall threw caution to the wind and stormed into the Pale's underground caves. The ogre mage expected a fight, but he found none. The Pale did not resist his intrusion. They were eager to share their prophecy of doom, which they called the Hour of Twilight. The Pale saw this as a time when shadow would envelop the universe and snuff out all life in existence. Cho'gall had little interest in this Hour of Twilight. Far more intriguing to him was the Pale's shadow magic. He had never experienced its like, and he knew it would serve as a potent weapon for the Horde. To win the exiles to his side, Cho'gall used their beliefs to his advantage. He claimed that the Horde was a means to an end-a weapon by which they could bring about the Hour of Twilight. The Pale reveled in this opportunity to serve as agents of apocalypse. They committed themselves to the Horde and formed a new orc clan known as the Twilight's Hammer. As he learned to master shadow magic, Cho'gall also began to see truth in the Pale's prophecy. It would take him many years, but the ogre mage would eventually devote himself to their quest.
Under Warchief Blackhand, the Horde launched a coordinated offensive against minor draenei settlements and outposts across the world. Armed with mighty siege engines and new weapons, the orcs toppled their enemy's defenses and razed stronghold after stronghold. As these battles progressed, draenei morale foundered. It was not the defeats alone that wore away at their spirits, but the startling revelation that the Burning Legion was influencing the orcs. The signs were now all around the draenei. Some orcs had become warlocks, and their rampant use of fel magic was taking its toll on Draenor. Forests were dying. Streams and rivers were drying up or becoming polluted with foul energies. No one was more shocked by this than Velen. His ability to reliably foresee the future had almost returned, but it did not matter anymore. The discovery that the orcs had become tools of the Legion had taken the draenei by surprise. Velen and the exarchs long debated what to do. They had no means of escaping Draenor. Their only chance of survival was holding off the Horde's onslaught and hoping the Legion did not follow up with a full-scale invasion. The draenei leadership knew they could no longer defend their outlying settlements from the Horde. They ordered their forces to withdraw to Shattrath and the Temple of Karabor. Fortifying these two cities became their most pressing goal. The draenei were not the only ones to notice the effect of fel magic on Draenor. For years, these energies had dampened the power of elementals and thrown them into turmoil. Yet as the warlocks' magic began killing Draenor, something changed in the world's native spirits. They rallied together, vowing to destroy the orcs and stop their desecration of the land. The elementals pooled their dwindling strength and fused into a single mighty being.
Its name was Cyrukh the Firelord, and it would shatter the Horde forever.
After much of Draenor had fallen under the orcs' control, Blackhand commanded the clans to gather near the Temple of Karabor, the spiritual heart of draenei society. The assault would be the largest ever conducted by the Horde thus far. Blackhand believed that by destroying Karabor, the orcs could break the draenei's morale. This would then make conquering the heavily fortified capital, Shattrath, all the easier. The Horde met little resistance as it approached Karabor. All seemed well as the orcs camped near a volcano outside the temple. Then, without warning, the mountain erupted in fire. Cyrukh took form in the heart of the volcano. The Firelord unleashed his elemental wrath on the orcs, and a roaring firestorm swept down the mountain and tore through the Horde's ranks. Cyrukh's appearance stunned and terrified the orcs, especially former shaman. Many of them saw the attack as a sign that they had angered the elements by embracing fel magic. Gul'dan scrambled to forestall catastrophe. If the warlocks abandoned the Horde, the orcs would never conquer the draenei. In Cyrukh, Gul'dan saw a golden opportunity. The elements had gathered all of their power in one place. They had made themselves vulnerable. Gul'dan would make them pay for that. He would steal Cyrukh's power for himself and for the rest of the Horde, and he would destroy the connection between the orcs and Draenor's elementals once and for all. Gul'dan gathered his Shadow Council followers on the volcano's slopes. None of them-not even those who had once been shaman-hesitated to perform the task at hand. The Shadow Council warlocks had given themselves entirely to the pursuit of fel magic. Together, they wove an immense spell that flooded Cyrukh with fel power and shattered the being's physical form. The mountain roared in protest. Chasms tore through the earth and spewed forth rivers of fel and elemental energies. Gul'dan and his warlocks used these energies to infuse the other orcs with strength. Gul'dan had succeeded. The Horde's soldiers were now more powerful
than ever before, and the last connection between the orcs and the elemental spirits had been severed. The fel volcano in Shadowmoon Valley would come to be known as the Hand of Gul'dan.
GUL'DAN DESTROYS DRAENOR'S ELEMENTAL MIGHT
For weeks, Prophet Velen and the exarchs had watched the massive Horde army march through Shadowmoon Valley, trampling everything in its path. The draenei did all they could to prepare for the siege. Artificers strengthened the temple's defenses. Vindicators and Rangari from Shattrath City streamed into Karabor's harbor, eager for battle. When the volcano in Shadowmoon Valley erupted in a gout of fel energy, fear raced through Karabor's defenders. Many draenei had heard that the orcs were in league with the Burning Legion, but few had actually seen evidence of it. Now, the proof was right before their eyes. Velen walked among Karabor's draenei, imbuing his people with the Light and inspiring them with courage. Even as the Horde reached the stronghold and unleashed its siege engines, he remained on the front lines. The Horde's bombardment was relentless. Siege engines hurled boulders imbued with fel energy against the temple's walls until they crumbled. Thousands of howling orcs stormed through the breaches and clashed with Rangari and heavily armored Vindicators. Karabor's defenders fought with a ferocity that the orcs had never witnessed in the draenei before. Against all odds, Velen and his outnumbered forces pushed the Horde back and held the army at bay. For a moment, victory seemed within reach for the draenei. Then it slipped away. Behind Horde lines, Gul'dan and his Shadow Council had found a way to break the stalemate. They had turned their attention to the Dark Star that drifted over Shadowmoon Valley. Unbeknownst to the orcs, this strange celestial object was the decaying naaru named K'ara. The being had succumbed to shadow, and its body exuded potent Void energies. The Shadowmoon orcs had long known that the Dark Star pulsed with extraordinary power, and they had treated the object as sacred. For generations, the clan forbade anyone from tapping into its energies. Gul'dan and his warlocks cared little for such ancient laws. As one, the Shadow Council conducted a ritual that drew out the Dark
Star's power and channeled it on Karabor. A pillar of Void energy ripped through the heavens and slammed down atop the draenei positions in the temple. Many of the defenders died instantly. Others were driven to madness by the waves of shadow magic that engulfed the city. Calling on every ounce of his willpower, Velen narrowly held the Void at bay. He rallied what survivors he could and led them on a daring escape toward Karabor's harbor. As the Horde renewed its assault on the temple, the Prophet and his people sailed out of harm's reach. Though Velen survived, Karabor was lost. The influx of Void energy forever darkened the once-glorious stronghold. It would become known as the Black Temple. The victorious Horde stormed through Karabor's streets and celebrated its triumph by desecrating the draenei's holy relics. The orcs rooted out the defenders who remained. Few were shown the mercy of a quick death. The Horde took many of them prisoner. Gul'dan immediately claimed the Black Temple. Publicly, he stated that it would serve as a fortress to hold draenei prisoners, where he and a handful of warlocks could interrogate the captives. In truth, the Black Temple would act as a new base of operations for the Shadow Council. Gul'dan convinced Blackhand that separating his clandestine order from the Citadel would allow the Shadow Council to remain unseen by the rest of the Horde. The reality was that Gul'dan also wanted to distance himself from the warchief so that he could work free from Blackhand's ever-watchful eyes. Gul'dan and his Shadow Council took charge of the draenei prisoners. They subjected the captives to brutal torture to gather what information they could about Shattrath's defenses. In time, they discovered much about the city. Shattrath boasted a larger garrison than Karabor, and it would be much harder to conquer. It would be the greatest challenge the Horde had ever faced.
Kil'jaeden was pleased with the Horde's victory, despite Velen's escape. He would have preferred to see the Prophet dead. Better yet, he would have preferred to see Velen captured so that the demon lord himself could humiliate and torture him. But it was only a matter of time before the Prophet met his end. Of greater concern to Kil'jaeden was the task of conquering Shattrath. The Horde had seized Karabor, but only by harnessing the Dark Star's power. That was a trick they couldn't use again. Moreover, the warlock technique of infusing young orcs with fel magic to make them more powerful was not as promising as it had once seemed. Kil'jaeden knew that Gul'dan and his followers needed something more-something greater-if they were to take Shattrath. Gul'dan and his warlocks had previously empowered their kin with fel energies, but this process only granted them limited strength. Drinking the blood of a demon was a far superior method that would give the orcs otherworldly power. This act would also complete their corruption and shackle them to the Burning Legion's will forever. Kil'jaeden revealed these plans to Gul'dan, reminding him of the power he would be granted if he continued loyally serving the demon lord. The warlock had not forgotten that promise. Orchestrating the corruption of his race was a small price to pay for godhood. Gul'dan convinced Blackhand to arrange a gathering of the clans atop a mountain near the Citadel, where he would empower the orcs. He never told Blackhand what the source of this power would be; he told him only that he had discovered a new way of wielding fel magic. As Blackhand ordered the clans to assemble, Kil'jaeden called upon his great power and opened a temporary gateway to the Black Temple. Through it, a pit lord known as Mannoroth the Destructor emerged. This monstrous
horned demon was one of the Legion's greatest generals, and he had led countless assaults against its enemies. Mannoroth radiated a power and malevolence that Gul'dan had never experienced. Even the warlock, who feared little, cowered in the demon's presence. Gul'dan went to great lengths to keep Mannoroth a secret, informing only his most trusted Shadow Council warlocks of the demon and the reason for his appearance on Draenor. Yet Ner'zhul learned the truth. In their arrogance, Gul'dan and his Shadow Council had often kept the elder shaman close by so that he could witness the gradual corruption of his race. They believed he was too broken and cowardly to ever act on what he saw. They were wrong. Ner'zhul had spent years lost in the depths of self-loathing and regret, but when he discovered the plans to have orcs drink demon blood, something changed. If he didn't act, he knew that his entire race would be doomed. Ner'zhul mustered his courage and set out to warn someone about Gul'dan's intentions. He was aware that most of the orc chieftains would ignore his words. They were too loyal to Blackhand and the Horde, too drunk on the intoxicating might of fel power. However, there was one who was not like the others: Chieftain Durotan. He'd become increasingly reluctant to wage war against the draenei, and this news had reached Ner'zhul. If there was anyone who would heed the shaman's warnings, it was the Frostwolves' noble leader. As Gul'dan and his warlocks prepared for the meeting of the orcs, Ner'zhul planted an anonymous missive to Durotan among Shadow Council orders that were bound for the Frostwolf clan. In the message, he urged the chieftain not to follow Gul'dan's command at the upcoming gathering, or Durotan and his people would suffer a fate worse than death. The Shadow Council would never know of Ner'zhul's actions.
A top the mountain that loomed near the Citadel, Gul'dan addressed the gathered chieftains. He unveiled a pool of Mannoroth's smoldering blood, but he did not reveal its true source. Gul'dan simply announced that the green liquid was a gift from the gracious beings who had taught the orcs fel magic. Now, these same benefactors wanted to give the clans something more. By drinking from the pool, the orcs would be granted a strength akin to that of gods. Gul'dan challenged the chieftains to accept this gift, and Grommash Hellscream was the first to step forward. Always one to show his fearlessness, the Warsong chieftain drank deep of Mannoroth's blood. A hush fell over the orcs at what happened next. Grommash grew taller, and his muscles bulged as power flooded his veins. A hellish red glow blazed bright in his eyes. With a mighty war cry, the Warsong chieftain howled for the blood of the draenei. The other orcs in attendance would not be denied this power. Nearly all clamored to drink and experience the rush of might that Grommash had. Only a few would hold back, including Orgrim Doomhammer and Chieftain Durotan. Durotan had received Ner'zhul's anonymous missive, and he had taken the warning to heart. Knowing that speaking out against the Horde at this time would mean death, he stayed silent. Yet he would not allow his clan to partake of Gul'dan's "gift" under any circumstances. Durotan simply refused to drink, claiming it was his choice to make. This act of defiance infuriated Gul'dan. He was already suspicious of the Frostwolf chieftain. Now he wondered if Durotan had discovered something about the Burning Legion and its plans to enslave the orcs. Gul'dan's patience with Durotan was wearing thin, but with the assault on Shattrath approaching, he could not afford killing the chieftain and upsetting the Frostwolves. Orgrim also rejected the offer to drink. Much like Durotan, he'd grown concerned with the Horde's bloodthirsty nature and its rampant use of fel
energy. The Blackrock warrior had looked on with horror as the magic dried up Draenor's pristine rivers and killed its bountiful forests. Deep down, Orgrim knew that something was amiss with Gul'dan's gift. To avoid drawing suspicion, Orgrim claimed that he was not worthy to drink from the same cup that Blackhand had; after all, he was but a servant of the warchief. Orgrim's plan worked. Both Gul'dan and Blackhand saw his refusal to drink as a sign of servitude.
HELLSCREAM DRINKS DEMONIC BLOOD The orcs who drank Mannoroth's blood reveled in power as their bodies twisted and swelled with might. All hesitation, fear, and uncertainty faded from their minds. These same effects would gradually spread throughout the rest of the Horde. Though not every orc had drunk Mannoroth's blood, those who had would radiate an invisible aura of fel energy. It would slowly seep into the skin and bones of nearby orcs. Eventually even Durotan, Orgrim, and others who had not tasted demon blood would find their skin turning completely green. At the gathering place, the orcs who had consumed Mannoroth's blood beat their chests and screamed for the heads of draenei. Warchief Blackhand would give them what they wanted. That very night,
he ordered the Horde to march on Shattrath City en masse. The orcs set out, and Gul'dan infused the mountain at their backs with fel energy. The earth groaned and split, and gouts of fire erupted from the ground. Gul'dan claimed it was a sign of their impending victory, just as the erupting volcano had heralded their conquest of Karabor. The sight of the trembling mountain filled the orcs with unbridled courage. In time, this broken mountain would become known as the Throne of Kil'jaeden.
THE MAG'HAR One group of orcs would remain unaffected by these fel energies. They were individuals who were infected by the red pox and quarantined in Garadar. Among them was Grommash Hellscream's own son, Garrosh. Due to their isolation, the infected would not turn green like the rest of their race. These orcs would eventually become known as the Mag'har, or the "Uncorrupted."
Shattrath was doomed. Velen had foreseen it. In the weeks after Karabor's fall, the Prophet had suffered from visions of apocalypse. He had seen a blood-red sky over Shattrath, weeping poison that twisted his people into monsters. He had seen thousands of brave draenei males, females, and children cut to pieces by the orcs. And he had seen Shattrath, their beloved refuge, consumed in a roaring inferno of fel fire. Though Velen still questioned the certainty of his visions, he would not take any chances. The draenei could not hold Shattrath forever. That much was clear. At first, Velen called for the full evacuation of Shattrath, but that would only momentarily forestall the Horde. The orcs would continue hunting the draenei until they were sure they'd destroyed them all. Velen and his followers agreed to another plan. Many of the draenei civilians would flee to safety, but the bulk of their military would remain in Shattrath. They would sacrifice their lives to make the Horde believe it had destroyed them. It was a terrible burden to place upon Shattrath's defenders, but the draenei didn't shy away from this duty. Velen vowed to be one of these defenders. He had abandoned Karabor to the Horde, and he would not do the same to Shattrath. He would die protecting the city if need be. The exarchs argued against this. In their hearts, they knew that Shattrath was doomed to fall. If their race had any hope of survival, it would be under Velen's wise leadership. After a full day of heated discussion, they finally persuaded the Prophet to leave Shattrath. While the clans were setting out from the Throne of Kil'jaeden, Velen and the exarchs made their preparations. The Prophet led many civilians to Telredor, a remote temple built upon an island in the Zangar Sea. Meanwhile, Rangari scouts harassed the Horde lines, slowing their approach. In Shattrath itself, the Vindicators shored up their defenses. As the clans approached Shattrath, Kil'jaeden's ethereal form appeared before them. He no longer saw the need to stay hidden now that the orcs had shackled their souls to the Legion.
Kil'jaeden revealed himself as one of the benefactors who had gifted the orcs with fel magic and other powers. To help them crush the draenei and topple their stronghold, he would once again give them weapons. He granted knowledge of new destructive spells to the warlocks-spells that would drive fear into their enemies' hearts. Meanwhile, Gul'dan unveiled a devious weapon his Shadow Council had crafted for the siege. The warlocks had melded their magics with the red pox and created a volatile concoction that would spread the plague to the draenei. The Shadow Council loaded the mixture into crude bombs, which were then lobbed against Shattrath by siege engines. The bombs exploded against Shattrath's walls and released a foul mist that burned the draenei's skin and choked the breath from their lungs. A thick red fog enveloped Shattrath's battlements and shrouded the approaching Horde army from sight. As the mist wreaked havoc among Shattrath's defenders, the orcs flooded through breaches in the city walls. Using the spells Kil'jaeden had taught them, warlocks summoned fiery green meteors from the heavens and sent them crashing against Shattrath's ramparts. These smoldering rocks arose as enormous demons known as infernals. Maraad, Akama, Nobundo, and thousands of Shattrath's other defenders stood firm against the Horde's onslaught. They knew they were doomed, and their only wish was to take as many orcs as they could with them. Amid the brutal fighting, the remaining draenei refugees scrambled to flee from the city. Some of these groups were led by Maraad and his fellow Vindicators. Though the holy warriors did not wish to flee the fighting, they knew the importance of saving innocents. Many of the Vindicators did not succeed. Rivers of blood flowed through Shattrath's streets, temples, and courtyards. No one was spared from the marauding Horde. It was not long before Shattrath fell. Many of the Horde's soldiers lay dead alongside the slain draenei. It had been the orcs' costliest battle yet, but they had won. Despite the victory, Gul'dan was troubled. Velen had once again escaped. The warlock feared that Kil'jaeden would be furious about this development. Gul'dan had not yet been contacted by the demon lord, and he hoped to track down the Prophet before he was. He immediately dispatched Garona to hunt for Velen, and the Shadow Council assassin committed herself to the task.
She would spend years scouring Draenor in search of the Prophet, but she would never find him.
Thousands of draenei perished in Shattrath, but their sacrifices had allowed many civilians to escape. A number of Vindicators, priests, and Rangari also survived the initial attack. They retreated to the tomb city of Auchindoun in the hopes of defending it from the Horde. Auchindoun was the holiest draenei site in the world, and these defenders could not bear the thought of the orcs desecrating their ancestors or the naaru housed within. Exarch Maladaar organized the military forces that came to Auchindoun. They fortified the tomb city's catacombs and awaited the inevitable Horde attack. Gul'dan knew of the draenei presence in Auchindoun, and he feared that they might call upon the spirits of their ancestors to wage war against the Horde. The warlock dispatched Teron'gor and his most powerful Shadow Council agents to prevent this from happening. Teron'gor and the other warlocks stormed Auchindoun and met fierce resistance from the tomb's defenders. Though the warlocks' powers were mighty, so were the draenei's Light-given abilities. Maladaar and his followers also received aid from Auchindoun's spirits. The draenei and their ancestors slaughtered many of the Shadow Council's agents. Victory was slipping through the Shadow Council's grasp. As Maladaar and his forces closed in, Teron'gor called on his remaining allies. Using the new knowledge Kil'jaeden had shared with them, the warlocks pooled their powers and reached beyond the veil of reality. They hoped to summon a powerful demon into the world, one that would strike down their enemies. In their wild desperation, the warlocks summoned something far different. An otherworldly elemental creature known as Murmur materialized within Auchindoun, pulled to Draenor from a distant corner of the universe. The shockwave of its arrival ripped the earth asunder, killing many of the draenei
and blasting apart the tomb city. Murmur's destructive energies rolled out from Auchindoun in waves and leveled the surrounding forests.
MAP OF DRAENOR DURING THE WAR BETWEEN THE HORDE AND THE DRAENEI Exarch Maladaar and a handful of his draenei used their magics to shield themselves from the blast. Though they survived, they no longer had the numbers to resist the Shadow Council. Teron'gor and his warlocks overwhelmed the draenei and bound them in chains. The Shadow Council then contained Murmur deep within Auchindoun. A few warlocks stayed in the tomb city to keep the creature from getting loose and wreaking havoc on the Horde. In the years that followed, the charred, lifeless land around Auchindoun would become known as the Bone Wastes. It would serve as a bitter reminder of all that the draenei had lost.
A uchindoun's destruction signaled the death knell of the draenei on Draenor. Though Velen and some of his people had survived, their culture was no more. They were refugees once again, but this time they were trapped on a dying world filled with the Burning Legion's agents. Velen ordered his Artificers to reinforce Telredor's defenses. The draenei smiths constructed a network of arkonite crystals that shrouded the temple's presence from the Horde. As the months passed, Vindicator Maraad and other draenei survivors trickled into Telredor. They spoke little of the horrors they had witnessed at Shattrath. They would carry those memories with them in silence, their hearts and minds scarred forever. Other survivors were burdened by more than just mental scars. Vindicators Akama and Nobundo were among the unfortunate draenei who had succumbed to the Horde's red pox. The vile concoction had twisted their bodies, causing them to become smaller and shriveled. These cursed draenei even found that their connection to the Holy Light had been severed. The Krokul, or "Broken," as some of these individuals were called, were not welcomed by the rest of their race. Telredor's populace feared that the mutants would spread their affliction to healthy draenei. Despite calls by Velen and Maraad to accept the Broken, they were eventually driven from the refuge. Akama, Nobundo, and other Broken struck out into the wilds to fend for themselves. The red mist affected some of them in different ways. The unluckiest of the Broken degraded into creatures called the Lost Ones. They became even more physically deformed, and they gradually lost their grip on sanity. This was the eventual fate that awaited every Broken. All that the mutants could do was hope to find some means to cure themselves or slow their degeneration. Other draenei survivors would found enclaves across Draenor. Velen
would later travel among these different safe havens, both to prevent himself from being captured by the Horde and to help his people however he could. Despite his efforts, the draenei would live in constant fear of tomorrow. They never knew when the Horde might uncover their hideaways. Telredor would remain the largest and most important of these sites. As time passed and fel energy continued killing the world, the sea around the island would dry up and form a swampy mire called Zangarmarsh.
As the orcs were wiping out the draenei, Warchief Blackhand dispatched scouts to keep him apprised of Draenor's other civilizations. He planned to conquer them one day, but the destruction of the draenei was paramount. Once Shattrath had fallen, Blackhand turned his full attention to the rest of the world's inhabitants. Chieftain Kilrogg led the Bleeding Hollow on a campaign into Farahlon, a lush island that served as the last bastion of the primals. Its isolated location also made it one of the few places on Draenor that were unsullied by fel magic. The forests there were dense, but Kilrogg and his followers were well adapted to fighting in such terrain. Reaching the island proved difficult. The orcs were not seafarers, and they relied on ogre shipwrights to build vessels capable of crossing the ocean. Once in Farahlon, orc warlocks leeched life from the primals and used the stolen power to set the forests alight. As the wilds burned, Kilrogg and his army slaughtered every botani and genesaur they could find. Meanwhile, the Warsong and Twilight's Hammer clans toppled the ogre bastion of Highmaul. Chieftains Grommash and Cho'gall both took part in the siege, and both relished the opportunity to slay ogres. For Cho'gall, the siege of Highmaul was particularly gratifying. It was an opportunity to enact vengeance upon those who had exiled him from the city. He sought out and killed the stronghold's leader, Imperator Mar'gok. Both were two-headed ogres. Both were gifted sorcerers. Yet only Cho'gall had learned the secrets of fel magic and the Void. Armed with these powers, he bound Mar'gok to his throne and burned the rival ogre mage alive. Elsewhere, Blackhand tasked the Frostwolf, Thunderlord, and Whiteclaw clans with wiping out the world's gronn, ogron, and magnaron, as well as many ogres. Apart from the Highmaul, most ogres had already joined the Horde. However, there were a few holdouts. Blackhand had no interest in winning their loyalty. He had given them a chance to join him. Now he wanted the brutes dead.
The Frostwolves and the Whiteclaws saw no honor in hunting down the gronn, ogron, magnaron, and ogres. They held most of their warriors back. Yet Chieftain Fenris and his Thunderlords did not shy away from the task. They reveled in the slaughter of their ancient enemies.
REXXAR AND THE MOK'NATHAL Blackhand also considered annihilating the mok'nathal, but he stayed his hand. One of the half-breeds, Rexxar, had joined the Horde and convinced the warchief to spare his people. Rexxar was the son of the mok'nathal leader, Leoroxx. The young halfbreed did not agree with his father's isolationist philosophies. Rexxar longed for glory in battle. He also believed that the Horde could help the mok'nathal find new sources of water and food. Though Rexxar would devote himself to the Horde, he would later learn that its purpose was not noble.
One of the few gronn to escape the Horde's onslaught was known as Gruul. He lorded over a small number of ogres and gronn in Gorgrond. Gruul far surpassed the rest of his kind in brute strength and cunning. From his remote lair in the mountains, he fended off multiple Thunderlord assaults. Casualties grew so great that Fenris abandoned the attacks.
The high arakkoa in the Spires of Arak posed one of the greatest challenges to the Horde. This intelligent race had rediscovered ancient Apexis technology. From this knowledge, the high arakkoa had fashioned an immense cannon atop their lofty capital, Skyreach. The mechanism would harness the fiery power of the sun to defend their lands from the Horde. Warchief Blackhand called on Kargath Bladefist to deal with these arakkoa. The vicious chieftain formed an invasion force from the Shattered Hand, Burning Blade, and Dragonmaw clans. The lightly armored but highly mobile army stormed the forests surrounding Skyreach, but the invaders were not prepared for the high arakkoa's weaponry. Upon seeing the orcs approach, Skyreach's defenders ignited their cannon. A searing beam of fire exploded from atop Skyreach and lanced across the forests, incinerating dozens of orcs where they stood. Rather than mount another direct assault, Kargath sought allies in nearby Terokkar Forest: Outcast arakkoa. These wingless creatures hated Skyreach and its inhabitants. More importantly, they knew the high arakkoa's secrets. Kargath struck a bargain with the Outcasts. They would infiltrate the high arakkoa's city and destroy their weaponry. Once they'd succeeded, the orcs would join the fight and slaughter the remaining high arakkoa. The Outcasts could then claim Skyreach for themselves. Enticed by the offer, the Outcasts snuck into Skyreach and waged war against the city. They did not have the numbers to defeat the high arakkoa, but that was not their purpose. Using their shadowy powers, the Outcasts stormed through Skyreach and destroyed the mechanism atop the city. A blinding explosion tore through the sky, setting the heavens aflame. When Kargath and his forces finally arrived, they slaughtered the high arakkoa and cast their bodies from the city. But they did not stop there. The battle-crazed orcs also turned on their "allies" and cut down the Outcasts. Kargath saw these wingless arakkoa as a threat. They were cunning and intelligent creatures. He assumed that they would one day learn to wield the same powers that the high arakkoa had. That was not a risk Kargath was
willing to take. What was more, he simply enjoyed betraying the wretched Outcasts. Kargath's followers did not kill every high arakkoa they came across. Some, they took prisoner. Based on what the Outcasts had told him of Sethekk Hollow, Kargath ordered that these captives be cast into the region's cursed pools. The chieftain reveled in the sight of high arakkoa writhing in agony as shadow energy transformed them into withered Outcasts. In the end, the Horde assault on the Spires of Arak destroyed high arakkoan civilization and killed nearly all of the Outcasts. Only a small number of the wingless arakkoa survived, including those who were recently hurled into Sethekk Hollow. The Outcasts shrouded themselves in the shadows, and they took refuge from the Horde in the deepest corners of Terokkar Forest. The high arakkoa who'd been transformed into Outcasts banded together under the leadership of a former Skyreach guard named Grizzik. He led his followers to Auchindoun, knowing that most orcs feared the haunted ruins. There, he nursed a bitter hatred of the Horde, and he awaited the day when he might exact vengeance on those who had spilled the blood of his people.
During the attack on Shattrath, Kil'jaeden met with Sargeras and informed him of the orcs and his work corrupting them. The Legion's ruler was pleased by what he learned. The orcs were an unstoppable force, infused with demon blood and loyal to the Legion. Yet they were more than just another race conscripted into his army. Sargeras had been searching for the right weapon to weaken Azeroth's defenses in preparation for a full-scale Legion invasion. The Horde would serve as the perfect tool to do so. Sargeras ordered Kil'jaeden to cut all communication with his agent, Gul'dan, and the other orcs. They were flush with victory, and that made them arrogant and unruly. Sargeras wanted the orcs to be on the brink of selfdestruction, so desperate that they would embark on any quest if it meant saving themselves-so desperate that they would journey to another world. Unaware of the Legion's plans, the orcs floundered on Draenor. They had conquered much of the world, but they were killing it in the process. Fel magic had transformed most of Draenor into a barren desert. Nowhere was this more apparent than in Tanaan Jungle. The region was now a cracked wasteland of red dust and bones. It became known as Hellfire Peninsula, and the Horde capital at its western edge was renamed Hellfire Citadel. Warchief Blackhand knew that eventually the Horde would run out of water and food. He turned to Gul'dan for answers and demanded to know what orders Kil'jaeden had given him. Surely, the great benefactor had foreseen these events and would propose a solution. Blackhand didn't know the terrible truth. Kil'jaeden had stopped communing with Gul'dan. The demon lord's silence had come suddenly and without warning. Panic and paranoia had seized Gul'dan. Kil'jaeden had promised him godhood if he destroyed the draenei, and the orc warlock had delivered his end of the bargain. Bitterness and anger consumed Gul'dan. He wondered if the demon lord had merely used him and the orcs as pawns to exterminate the draenei. Gul'dan kept this development a secret from Blackhand. The warlock's connection with Kil'jaeden gave him influence. If Blackhand knew Gul'dan
was no longer communing with the benefactor, he would see it as a weakness and kill Gul'dan. For now, Gul'dan convinced Blackhand to wait while Kil'jaeden chose their path forward. In the year that followed, hunger took its toll on the orcs. They hunted most of Draenor's native creatures to extinction. The Dragonmaw turned on their trained rylaks and used them as a source of food, while Warsong raiders did the same to their wolf mounts. The threat of starvation only made the orcs more agitated and aggressive. Bloodlust still seared through their veins, but they had no other foe to fight. Many orcs turned on each other. They clashed in short-lived battles that left hundreds dead. The Lightning's Blade, Whiteclaw, and Redwalker clans suffered greatly in these conflicts. Some clans lost themselves completely to the depths of madness. These included the Warsongs, the Bonechewers, the Laughing Skull, the Shattered Hand, and the Thunderlords. To protect the rest of the Horde from these violent clans, Blackhand banished them from Hellfire Citadel. He drove these belligerent orcs into remote areas of Hellfire Peninsula, where they could fight among themselves. That way, Blackhand could preserve some of the Horde's dwindling strength. But Blackhand and Gul'dan knew this was only a temporary solution to a much greater problem. Unless something changed, the Horde would devour itself. From afar, Sargeras watched the orcs spiral into uncertainty. Soon enough, they would find salvation. He had corrupted a vessel on Azeroth, an extraordinary individual whom he could use to launch the Horde's invasion of the world. This vessel was a human named Medivh, one of the most powerful magi in history.


The corruption of Medivh was set into motion long before he was born. Thousands of years ago, a secretive order called the Council of Tirisfal began watching over Azeroth, protecting it from intrusions by the Burning Legion's agents. The magi in this group channeled their powers into one member, who was known as the Guardian. This mighty individual singlehandedly scoured the world for any sign of demonic activity. While Sargeras was searching for a mortal on Azeroth whom he could use to initiate the Legion's next invasion, his attention turned to the current Guardian. Her name was Aegwynn, and she was one of the greatest magi who had ever lived. She was also proud and bold, two traits that Sargeras knew would make her ideal for corruption. Sargeras infused a sliver of his vast power into a physical avatar, and then he opened a temporary gateway through which this vessel could reach Azeroth. In an icy region called Northrend, the fallen titan confronted Aegwynn. Just as Sargeras had hoped, the Guardian expended her strength to vanquish the avatar, leaving herself vulnerable. The Legion's lord took this opportunity to transfer a portion of his spirit to the mage's soul. Unbeknownst to Aegwynn, Sargeras subtly darkened her thoughts. Though the strong-willed mage proved to be too powerful to fully corrupt, the
Legion's ruler managed to turn her against her allies in the Council of Tirisfal. The order's members had always considered themselves as the Guardian's handlers, and they expected the mage to obey their commands and follow their advice. Yet Aegwynn did neither. As time passed, she grew disillusioned with the council and its motives. Recently, the order had begun meddling in the politics of human kingdoms, which made the Guardian suspicious. When the time came for Aegwynn to relinquish her powers so another could take her place, she refused. The council initially considered appointing a new Guardian, but the idea was abandoned for fear that the presence of two extremely powerful magi would draw unwanted attention to the secret order. A different approach would be taken. The council formed an order of mage hunters called the Tirisgarde to apprehend Aegwynn. One of these individuals was a human named Nielas Aran. He, too, came to loathe the council's political schemes. Rather than fight Aegwynn, he became her closest confidant.
THE TOMB OF SARGERAS After vanquishing Sargeras's avatar, Guardian Aegwynn sought a place to bury the body so that its dark magic would not disturb the world. She settled on the sunken ruins of an ancient night elven temple-which some legends say was built upon an even older structure of mysterious origins. This site housed powerful seals that negated nearby fel energy. Aegwynn added her own magic, reinforcing the structure and creating defensive measures to keep intruders out. In time, this place would become known as the Tomb of Sargeras.
Aegwynn decided to bear a child with Nielas. She would bequeath her Guardian powers to this child, who would be free from the council's control. For the first time in Azeroth's history, the world's Guardian would be beholden to no one. When Aegwynn gave birth to Medivh, she had no idea of the darkness she had passed on to him. Sargeras had possessed Medivh while he was still forming in his mother's womb. For years, the Legion's ruler would hide in the shadows of Medivh's soul. Medivh blossomed into a promising mage. He grew up in the capital of Stormwind, becoming friends with Prince Llane Wrynn and the knight-intraining Anduin Lothar. Nielas had taken on the position of the kingdom's official court conjurer, and he tutored his son in the ways of the arcane. Aegwynn, however, was not present. Centuries of acting as the Guardian had taken their toll on her. Now that her powers had passed on to Medivh, she was overcome with exhaustion. She retreated from the world to rest, but the gifted mage kept watch over her son from afar. On the eve of Medivh's fourteenth birthday, his dormant Guardian powers awakened, and he accidentally killed Nielas. The trauma sent the boy into a coma that would last years.
While Medivh was in a coma, Azeroth enjoyed a time of relative peace. However, that did not mean the world was safe. Conflict was a daily occurrence. Tribes battled with tribes, villages squabbled with villages, and kingdoms spied on kingdoms. Yet by and large, Azeroth's inhabitants were prosperous. In the Eastern Kingdoms, humans engaged in rigorous trade with dwarves, gnomes, and high elves. Some nations, like Lordaeron, acted as regional leaders and trendsetters. They mediated disagreements between smaller kingdoms and used their strong militaries to impose order over the land. Others, like Dalaran, made extraordinary advances in the study of the arcane arts and other academic fields. Still others focused their resources on defending themselves from old rivals. The elves of Quel'Thalas spent much of their time fending off encroachments from the Amani trolls. In Kalimdor, the night elves continued their ancient traditions. Druids explored the Emerald Dream, a realm of wonder and power that guided the natural life of the physical world. For the most part, the night elves kept their attention focused outward, to the cosmos, ever vigilant for the Burning Legion. The night elves still remembered the War of the Ancients, that dark time in history when demons invaded the world and nearly destroyed it. Many night elves believed that the Legion would eventually come back. They expected the demons' return to be dramatic, apocalyptic, heralded with fire and brimstone from the skies. None suspected that a mortal race from another world-a dying world-would soon seek to conquer Azeroth. And none suspected that Medivh, a man born to protect Azeroth, would make it all possible. Almost ten years after slipping into his coma, he finally awoke. In the days that followed, Medivh reunited with his old friends. Llane Wrynn was poised to become king of Stormwind. Anduin Lothar had risen in
the ranks and was a highly regarded knight and military commander. They were both happy to see that Medivh had recovered from his strange illness, but they were preoccupied by new troubles brewing in the south. Over the years, Stormwind's farmers and settlers had been pushing south, claiming more and more territory near the jungles of Stranglethorn Vale. That had brought them into conflict with the Gurubashi tribes. Blood had been spilled, and the conflict had escalated from small skirmishes to frequent raids by troll warbands. Llane's father, Barathen, the elderly king of Stormwind, dispatched his forces in a defensive manner, commanding his soldiers to intercept raiding parties but forbidding retaliatory strikes into Gurubashi land. He had no interest in a full-scale war with the trolls. His son advocated for a sterner posture: Llane wanted to teach the trolls a lesson, even if that meant invading Gurubashi territory. The private debates between king and prince grew heated. For months, Medivh took no part in Stormwind's politics. Since waking up, he had struggled to deal with his guilt over his father's death, an event he still did not truly understand. Unsettling dreams were also plaguing him. Sometimes he dreamt of a woman who urged him to travel to a place called Karazhan; other times he dreamt of a dark presence dwelling in his mind, twisting his thoughts. He decided to ignore these dreams. Medivh felt most at peace when he was with his friends, so he focused his attention on helping them. He joined their efforts in dealing with the Gurubashi.
King Barathen's strategy against the trolls was effective for a time, but it could not stop every attack. A troll raiding party slipped through Stormwind's patrol lines and cut a path of destruction through Westfall, the kingdom's breadbasket. Three towns were burned to the ground. Stormwind's soldiers eventually caught and slew all of the raiders, but it was too late for dozens of humans. Their deaths had been slow, barbaric, and gruesome. The atrocity became the talk of the kingdom. King Barathen met with Stormwind's lords and other nobles to discuss a response. Barathen was still focused on de-escalation. He declared that the armies of Stormwind would be bolstered but used only to strengthen their patrol routes. There would be no offensive against the Gurubashi. Llane challenged him publicly, demanding that the blood of Stormwind's citizens be repaid in kind. Barathen was forced to rebuke his son in front of the royal court to end the protest. Llane was furious, not just for the humiliation but for what he saw as his father's cowardice. Lothar and many others felt the same way. In particular, Stormwind's soldiers were itching for revenge. But they would obey the king. It would be unthinkable for any loyal soldier to do otherwise...But Lothar suggested that if anyone would escape the hangman's noose for insubordination, it would be Llane and Lothar. Their ties to the king were too strong. And if they managed to stop the trolls for good, they would be forgiven. Llane loved the idea. A small, secret mission into the heart of Gurubashi lands might go unnoticed by both trolls and humans. But he also knew that mere steel would not be enough to carve out the heart of the Gurubashi's aggression. That would require something more: Medivh. The majority of Stormwind's populace considered Medivh to be simply a
powerful mage, but he had told Llane and Lothar the truth. He had revealed to them the secret history of the Guardian, the Council of Tirisfal, and his destiny. Llane and Lothar used this knowledge to pressure Medivh. Since he was the Guardian, wasn't he meant to protect the land from evil? Medivh was reluctant at first. He still hadn't found the limits of his power, and his hazy memories of what had happened to his father haunted him. After much consideration, he agreed to assist Llane and Lothar. It was not simply a matter of making his friends happy. Medivh had another motivation. He had never seen battle before. He had never slain an enemy. He wanted to see what his Guardian magic could truly do. In truth, he hungered for it. The three friends set off in secret, forging beyond Stormwind's borders. They infiltrated Stranglethorn Vale without incident, shrouded by Medivh's magic. The humans targeted a Gurubashi warlord named Jok'non, who dwelled in a ziggurat in central Stranglethorn. Their plan was to kill him quickly and retreat, leaving the trolls without a leader. The plan was anything but flawless. Jok'non and his followers had been experimenting with forbidden blood magic derived from one of their gods, a mighty and ancient creature known as Hakkar the Soulflayer. When battle erupted, it attracted a tremendous amount of attention. The three humans soon found themselves in a brutal fight for their lives. Medivh dueled Jok'non himself, facing a breed of magic he had never seen.
THE TERRITORIES OF THE EASTERN KINGDOMS PRIOR TO THE FIRST WAR Jok'non's dark power nearly overwhelmed Medivh. The Guardian was forced to abandon his apprehensions and unleash his full might. The resulting spell destroyed every single troll inside the ziggurat. Their howls of agony were heard in the darkest corners of Stranglethorn. Llane and Lothar had both seen death before. Even so, they were rattled by Medivh's power. The three men hurried back to Stormwind, but there was no joy in their victory. Llane and Lothar had seen Medivh's dark side, and they realized that their old friend was different in ways they could never understand. Even Medivh himself did not fully understand what he had done. He had never been taught that spell. He had no idea where that knowledge had come
from or if it had even been entirely powered by arcane magic. It disturbed him greatly.
None of the Gurubashi who had witnessed Warlord Jok'non's death survived, but it took little imagination for the trolls to guess who was responsible. The Gurubashi came together under the banner of the slain warlord's son, Zan'non, and marched to war against Stormwind. It had been centuries since the Gurubashi tribes had fought as one, and the humans were utterly unprepared for their fury. The trolls' numbers were frightening. Within days, Stormwind's southern defensive lines crumbled before the Gurubashi onslaught. Any civilians who could not escape were butchered in horrifying ways, their teeth, bones, and ears taken as trophies. The Gurubashi's objective was clear: burn Stormwind City to the ground. King Barathen recalled all forces to the stronghold's gates. His kingdom's survival would depend on one colossal battle. As the Gurubashi warbands approached, Llane told his father what he and his friends had done in Stranglethorn. Barathen was more disappointed than angry at his son. He did not punish the three young men. There was no need. The trolls would see to that soon enough. When the Gurubashi arrived at the city walls, the soldiers of Stormwind trembled at the trolls' numbers. Zan'non had learned some of his father's forbidden tricks. He'd used them to transform a few Gurubashi into hulking berserkers possessed of otherworldly strength. These mutated giants climbed Stormwind's walls and proceeded to rip its soldiers to pieces. The death toll on both sides mounted quickly. King Barathen knew that it would take a miracle to break the Gurubashi siege, so the old leader mounted a desperate counterattack with his personal guards. He stormed directly into the hellish front lines, seeking Zan'non's head. He almost succeeded, but the odds were against him. King Barathen died on the field of battle. Llane mourned his father's death, overcome with guilt about his foolish mission into Stranglethorn. Yet he knew that the city was now looking to him for guidance. Stormwind's forces had fallen into disarray. All seemed lost.
Llane pleaded with Medivh to unleash his power as he had done before, believing it was the only way to spare the city. Medivh agreed. The thought of calling on his full might frightened him... but, in a strange way, it also excited him.
MEDIVH DESTROYS THE GURUBASHI SIEGE
STORMWIND'S ISOLATION Barathen made no attempt to call on the northern human nations for help against the Gurubashi. The trolls were moving so quickly that reinforcements would never arrive in time. Yet even under different circumstances, the king
would have been loath to ask for aid. Years ago, Stormwind had requested assistance from the other human nations to fend off attacks by gnolls, but it had received none. Ever since then, Barathen and his people had become more isolationist, believing that they could deal with any threat on their own.
He stood upon Stormwind City's ramparts and rained fire and ice upon the Gurubashi. He froze them in their tracks; he incinerated them from within; he blasted them to pieces with pure arcane force. Their screams of pain drowned out the sounds of battle. Medivh soon realized that he was making sure their deaths were excruciating. He was even more horrified to discover that he enjoyed it. When Medivh called off his arcane barrage, Stormwind City still stood. The Gurubashi and their leader were dead. Only a handful of trolls had escaped the maelstrom of magic. The people of Stormwind mourned their dead and lauded their heroes. Medivh was seen as the realm's greatest defender. The kingdom welcomed Llane Wrynn as its new ruler. When Anduin Lothar was raised as one of the military's top commanders, there was nothing but approval from the citizens. The secret mission that had sparked the war was not known to the public, but the consequences of it weighed heavily upon Medivh and his friends. Many innocents had died due to their recklessness. Medivh understood that he did not have the will-the mental fortitude-to control his Guardian birthright. The woman in his dreams continued beckoning him to Karazhan in order to refine his powers. He now obeyed her; he was too terrified of what he might do if he didn't.
When Medivh arrived at the tower of Karazhan, the woman in his dreams was waiting for him. It was Aegwynn, the mother he had never known. And she was furious. He had taken too long to answer her call, and he had nearly destroyed a kingdom for it. Medivh accepted Aegwynn's ire; he was in no position to disagree with her. For over a year, mother and son made up for the time they'd been apart. Aegwynn took this opportunity to teach Medivh what it meant to be a true Guardian. Her first lesson was to convince him of the need for secrecy. He could not trust anyone, particularly the Council of Tirisfal. The secret order's original purpose had been to safeguard Azeroth against the Legion and empower a Guardian to confront demons directly. Over the centuries, its focus had drifted. The council now seemed more concerned with selfperpetuation than with Azeroth's preservation. The council also loathed Aegwynn. It had given her the power of the Guardian; she had refused to give it back and instead had passed it to her son. Aegwynn knew that the council would eventually learn that Medivh now held her power. Its members would undoubtedly be suspicious of him, the first person to receive such power without their permission. One of Aegwynn's closest friends, Moroes, agreed to stay with Medivh and help maintain the tower of Karazhan. Apart from interacting with this caretaker, she strongly urged her son to distance himself from the outside world. Other sorcerers would not understand his burden. In her view, not even the Kirin Tor, the magocrats of Dalaran, would have any knowledge that he needed. Medivh told his mother about the strange darkness that seemed to dwell within him. It had shown itself multiple times now, and he was afraid. Aegwynn dismissed his concerns. She had felt the same thing during her tenure as Guardian. She had come to believe it was simply the burden of power and the weight of responsibility. She did not know the truth, that Sargeras's dark presence had influenced her mind and was now twisting Medivh's thoughts.
Aegwynn eventually returned to her exile. It was difficult to part from her son, but she knew the Council of Tirisfal would never leave Medivh alone if the magi believed she was still at his side. Medivh retreated into the libraries of Karazhan and immersed himself in study. The responsibilities of a Guardian were many; the techniques, unlimited. He tried to make up for lost time as best he could. As Aegwynn had suspected, the Council of Tirisfal discovered that Medivh was the new Guardian. The order had heard of the mage's exploits in Stormwind. After some investigation, they had tracked him to Karazhan. By this time, the council had abandoned any thought of creating a second Guardian. Aegwynn's rebellion had taught them that they could not control such an individual, no matter how hard they tried. The council also knew that trying to force its control over Medivh might only anger him, as it had his mother. The council sent missives to Karazhan, politely asking Medivh for a meeting. He never replied. The council then tried something else: they convinced various mage orders and schools to send young magi to study under Medivh. None of these aspiring apprentices would know that their new mentor was the Guardian. Medivh was not a friendly mentor, and none of these first would-be students stayed for longer than a day. He felt the darkness within him growing, and he thought his isolation was the cause. Moroes understood-he had always disapproved of the way Aegwynn insisted on detaching herself from the world. He suggested that, if Medivh could not trust the Kirin Tor or the Council of Tirisfal, he could invite people from surrounding regions for a banquet instead. Surely they would not have ulterior motives other than curiosity, and the company would do him good. Medivh allowed it. There was a great feast, and the guests were awed by the wonders of the enchanted tower. A grand time was had by all, and their happiness even lifted the Guardian's mood. In the years that followed, Karazhan would host many more galas. Nobles from around Stormwind would come to regard Medivh's parties as exclusive high-society events. The Council of Tirisfal snuck a few agents into these festivities, but the magi were thoroughly confused by what their spies reported. By all accounts, Medivh was using his power and prominence to live a shallow life of luxury. It was not what they'd expected from the son of
Aegwynn. More potential apprentices showed up on Medivh's doorstep. He no longer made it a point to drive them away, but he accepted nothing less than excellence from them. If they made a single mistake, Medivh dismissed them. Few of these trainees remained in the tower for more than a week. Medivh was no longer alone, but his inner darkness soon engulfed every corner of his soul. Any fleeting moments of happiness seemed to disappear beneath the weight of crushing depression.
Between parties and galas, Medivh continued his studies. Aegwynn's words had a tremendous effect on him. He had fully embraced his destiny as the Guardian, and he was determined to learn how best to protect Azeroth. His libraries were filled with books about demonic lore, tactics, and powers. He devoured these writings as fast as he could. Then he turned his attention to Azeroth's own rich history. Medivh was inspired by the tales of the Legion's last invasion of Azeroth, the War of the Ancients. Different races and powerful creatures had come together to resist the unstoppable Burning Legion. He couldn't help but think of that war as the high-water mark for his world. Perhaps Azeroth would not -could not-match that glory again. The peoples of this world had spent millennia growing apart. Where once there had been purpose and unity, now there were only petty squabbles and bickering. His own experience had shown him that much. Trolls and humans had gone to war for insignificant reasons. The tribes, nations, and clans of Azeroth were happy to spill one another's blood for meaningless gains. It was as if no one on this world remembered that the Legion had not been destroyed in the War of the Ancients; it had only been temporarily defeated. If the demons invaded again, Azeroth would be too weak to throw them back. And they would invade again. Medivh had no doubts about that. Something radical needed to be done to prepare the world for their return. Had Medivh known what dark force was leading him down this road of despair-had he known that Sargeras had once had a similar crisis of faith- he might have resisted. Instead, he embraced a final conclusion that mirrored Sargeras's own solution to the question of encroaching evil: Azeroth was fundamentally flawed. It would never change on its own. Never. Someone needed to break everything that created divisions in the world- nations, cultures, governments, and kings. Azeroth was plagued with disorder. It needed a firm hand to change things. Medivh, the Guardian, would do what nobody else could.
Medivh concluded that he needed allies to accomplish his mission. He needed an army. Medivh used his Guardian powers to venture beyond Azeroth and into the cosmos. He visited new worlds and unseen corners of the Twisting Nether. At first, he searched for signs of an imminent Legion invasion of Azeroth. He was relieved to find none. Azeroth would have some time to prepare, at least. Sargeras subtly influenced Medivh to focus on a particular world: Draenor. Upon observing this place, the Guardian discovered a mighty and warlike people known as the orcs. They were truly fearsome to behold in battle, and they were under the Burning Legion's control. For a number of years, Medivh watched the orcs. He took on the form of a raven to travel across the land. A few orcs noticed this strange, small bird, but it caused no alarm. Medivh saw how effectively the orcs defeated the draenei, and then he saw how the Legion suddenly discarded them. He saw how their world shriveled and died due to the effects of their fel power, and he saw how desperate they had become. The Horde had been easily manipulated by the Burning Legion. Medivh knew he could do the same. The orcs would serve as the perfect army to transform Azeroth forever. And even better, it would delight Medivh to use the Legion's own puppets against it. As Medivh worked toward this purpose, he collected his thoughts in writing, documenting his most powerful discoveries and magical techniques in a volume that would come to be known as the Book of Medivh.
While Medivh was watching Draenor, the Horde edged closer to selfdestruction. Blackhand continued pressuring Gul'dan for a way to save their people. The warlock had no answer. He knew the day would soon come when Blackhand would reach the limits of his patience and kill Gul'dan. But that day never came. Medivh was ready to put his plan into effect. He showed himself to Gul'dan and the Shadow Council, disguised as a hooded stranger. Gul'dan bristled at the intrusion, and he lashed out at the stranger with the full might of his fel powers. The hooded figure did not fall. He turned Gul'dan's powers back on the orc. Medivh made it a painful event; he knew the warlock had sold his entire race to the Burning Legion, and the Guardian saw no reason to treat such a creature gently. Gul'dan's pride was severely wounded that day. The Shadow Council had watched him kneel before this mysterious stranger. It was an insult Gul'dan would never forget or forgive. Medivh didn't care. He told the orcs he could help them escape from Draenor if they built a vast magical portal. This gateway would take them to a new world, a bountiful realm that the Horde could conquer for its own. Visions of this world appeared in the minds of Gul'dan and his Shadow Council. It was glorious to behold, a place brimming with game, pristine rivers, and verdant grasslands. Its name was Azeroth. It was ripe for the taking, Medivh said. Gul'dan sensed something demonic in the hooded figure. He believed that this visitor was a demon who spoke on behalf of Sargeras. This, Gul'dan realized, was the reason for Kil'jaeden's sudden absence. The Legion had been preparing to send another messenger to advise him about what to do. In this instance, Gul'dan was correct. Medivh believed that he was laying the foundation to defeat the Legion once and for all, but he was instead bringing doom to his world.
Yet even with the knowledge that the Legion was working through the stranger, even with the orcs teetering on the brink of oblivion, Gul'dan demanded payment for his assistance. What would he personally receive for helping this stranger build a portal to conquer Azeroth? If it was power Gul'dan wanted, Medivh would offer it to him. A new vision flared bright in the warlock's mind. It depicted ancient underwater ruins-a place known as the Tomb of Sargeras. Medivh had no compunction about telling Gul'dan of this location. The tomb was at the bottom of the sea, and Aegwynn had reinforced it with a Guardian's power. There was no chance, in Medivh's mind, that Gul'dan would ever be capable of finding it or entering it. Nonetheless, he told the warlock that if the Horde conquered Azeroth, he would reveal the exact location of the tomb and grant him access to its extraordinary power. Gul'dan had little choice but to trust the stranger. He told Blackhand that he had found a new world for the orcs to conquer, one where they could find sustenance and also sate their battle lust. Yet to reach this place, they would need to create a massive gateway. To begin this process, Gul'dan sought out a convergence of Draenor's magical ley lines. He settled on a region at the eastern edge of Hellfire Peninsula. There, he and Blackhand ordered the orcs to construct an enchanted stone frame. It would become known as the Dark Portal, and it would help stabilize the magical gateway between Azeroth and Draenor.
Medivh made occasional trips to Draenor to observe the orcs' progress in building the Dark Portal. His absences were noticed. At first, they resulted in complaints from the nobles and entertainers who had come to Karazhan for various festivities. When the host was not there, the night was seen as a disappointment. Word of his disappearances eventually reached the Council of Tirisfal. Medivh was still a mystery to them. Years ago, they'd been concerned that he would be an enemy of the council, as Aegwynn was. Then he'd seemed to withdraw from the world, only emerging for parties and revelry. An immature young man who wanted to live a life of luxury and excess was not exactly who the council had hoped would be the Guardian, but it was far from the worst possible outcome. The order had called on the Kirin Tor's accomplished magi to keep watch over the world in the absence of an official Guardian. But if he had no true interest in the materialistic lifestyle he had cultivated, what were his real intentions? Where was the Guardian spending his time and energy? The council was no longer content to wait and see what Medivh intended to do with his astonishing power. At the council's behest, Kirin Tor magi covertly infiltrated Karazhan to find answers. Some disguised themselves as guests at Medivh's parties. Others sought ways to open portals directly into his libraries. Neither approach had any success. Medivh made sure that every one of their attempts failed and that the magi responsible returned home safe but disappointed. Though these intruders were from the Kirin Tor, Medivh knew that the Council of Tirisfal was guiding their actions. He needed to stop the council's meddling, for he believed it would never approve of his plan to "save" Azeroth. In the span of a week, four members of the Council of Tirisfal were found dead. There was no evidence of Medivh's involvement, no sign that arcane power had been used at all. In fact, during that week, the Guardian had made
appearances at Karazhan's parties every night. It did not seem possible for him to have committed the murders. The council's remaining members had suspicions, but they couldn't rule out the possibility that someone else was targeting them. In truth, they found it hard to imagine that Medivh could have fallen so far as to murder fellow magi. They ceased their spying on Karazhan and focused their efforts on discovering who was slaughtering them like lambs. Medivh was free to act once again.
As the Dark Portal took shape on Draenor, Gul'dan urged Blackhand to strengthen the clans. The warchief staged mock battles and duels between the orcs to give them an outlet for their bloodlust. The Horde had grown feeble, and it needed every fighter at its disposal for the coming invasion of Azeroth. Though many orcs reveled in combat, Durotan saw it as a disgrace to tradition. The Frostwolf chieftain could no longer stay silent about what was happening to his people. His world was dying. He had seen the orcs become bloodthirsty savages. Durotan began speaking out against Gul'dan and the use of fel magic. He urged the orcs to seek ways to heal their world. Most clans saw this as an act of treason and cowardice, and they lashed out at the Frostwolves. Gul'dan kept a careful watch on Durotan, but his efforts were focused on other things. He and Blackhand convinced the clans that conquering Azeroth was the only way their people would survive. Most orcs, especially those who had drunk Mannoroth's blood, were delighted at the opportunity to slaughter once again. Draenor was dying; none could deny that. If the Horde did not take this chance to build a new home, everyone would perish. Once the Dark Portal was built, Gul'dan worked with Medivh to open it. The warlock would conduct a ritual with his counterpart on Azeroth to tear a rift in the fabric of reality. The amount of raw power needed to do so was astonishing. It would require Gul'dan and Medivh to pool their magic together...but even that would not be enough on its own. Nearly every draenei prisoner who still lived was brought to the base of the Dark Portal. At the moment the ritual began, Gul'dan drained all of their life essences in an instant. That massive spike of power created the spark needed to cross such a large distance. Meanwhile, Medivh conducted his own spellwork on Azeroth. In an isolated swamp east of Karazhan known as the Black Morass, he called upon the full might of his Guardian energies to rip open a gateway. Due to his and Gul'dan's combined efforts, the Dark Portal shimmered and activated, forming a bridge between the two worlds.
Through the portal, Gul'dan and the orcs glimpsed Azeroth for the first time. The world that the hooded stranger had promised him was real. Blackhand sent his most trusted scouts-members of the Bleeding Hollow and the Black Tooth Grin clans-to survey the other side of the portal. They emerged in the Black Morass and quickly established a camp. A number of warlocks accompanied these scouts. They oversaw the effort to build an enchanted stone frame around the portal on the Azeroth side, which would stabilize the gateway and allow it to stay open for extended periods. As construction progressed, the orcs scouted more and more territory.
The sheer scale of magical power required to open the Dark Portal made the event impossible to hide. Medivh had concealed his activities as much as possible, but almost every creature attuned to magic on Azeroth felt ripples when the gateway roared to life. Most could not detect where the disturbance had come from. One person could. Aegwynn immediately set out to investigate the source. She was shocked to discover the Dark Portal and the green-skinned beings who had established a war camp in the Black Morass. They were clearly hostile, and they were laced with traces of the Burning Legion's fel power. Aegwynn had never seen orcs, nor had she heard of Draenor, but she was able to sense the bridge between the two worlds. And then, in a moment that shook her to her core, she recognized that a Guardian's magic had been used to make this possible. There was no mistaking it: the only person on Azeroth who was capable of using this power in this way was her son, Medivh. She also sensed the presence of fel magic intertwined with his. Aegwynn could not fathom what had happened, but she could only conclude that Medivh had somehow allied himself with the Legion. With a heavy heart, she set out to stop him. Accompanied by a blue dragon named Arcanagos-one of the few allies she had made during her long years of exile-she traveled to Karazhan to confront Medivh. The tower was crowded, filled with nobles who were expecting another exciting gala. Aegwynn entered the tower alone at first, hoping she could convince Medivh to give up his power peacefully. It was not to be. The creature she fought that day was not Medivh but Sargeras. The lord of the Burning Legion seized full control of the Guardian's mind, suppressing his thoughts and memories, controlling his every action. Sargeras revealed to Aegwynn that the darkness within her son was the same darkness she had felt as Guardian. It had nothing to do with her power or her burden. Sargeras had transferred a portion of his spirit into her when
they'd fought long ago in Northrend, and he had remained hidden within the mage until she gave birth to her son. Aegwynn was stunned as the truth set in. She had not bested Sargeras all those years ago; he had bested her. The darkness that had plagued her was not from the burden of Guardianship, but from her greatest nemesis lurking in her soul. Had she doomed her son to a life as a Legion slave? Had her entire tenure as Guardian been meaningless? These revelations might have broken a lesser human, but not Aegwynn. She did not lose herself to despair. No, she became angry. She would defeat Sargeras here and now, even if it meant striking down her beloved boy. And with that, Aegwynn and Sargeras went to battle once again. The opening blows of the fight shook the tower to its foundations. The would-be revelers tried to flee. Arcanagos leaped into the fray just as one of Sargeras's spells temporarily incapacitated Aegwynn. Despite being a dragon, Arcanagos was severely outmatched. Sargeras struck him down, burning the creature from the inside out, until all that remained was bone. The loss of her friend sent Aegwynn even further into the depths of rage, and she drew on her anger to break free of Sargeras's spell. The Legion's ruler might have had the full weight of a Guardian's power under his control, but she had centuries of experience. As the great duel continued raging through the tower, Aegwynn slowly gained the upper hand. Sargeras grew desperate. He reached out to power one final assault. In the same way that Gul'dan had drained the life from the draenei prisoners to activate the Dark Portal, Sargeras ripped the life out of the hundreds of humans who were fleeing Karazhan. Only one person, Moroes, was spared. Sargeras pushed Medivh to destroy Aegwynn once and for all. A small part of the Guardian's mind resisted the command. His power, brimming with the life force of hundreds of people, instead banished Aegwynn from Karazhan and hurled her elsewhere. Medivh didn't know where he had sent her, but he could not sense her presence anywhere on Azeroth. With the battle over, confusion rippled through Medivh's mind. At the moment of Aegwynn's defeat, Sargeras had retreated into the depths of the Guardian's soul. Medivh had no memory that the demon lord had controlled him, but he knew he had clashed with his mother. He feared that he had lost control of his power again, as he had all those years ago before he slipped
into a coma. This time, instead of only killing his father, he had slaughtered some of the most important nobles in the kingdom of Stormwind. The only survivor within Karazhan, Moroes, seemed to be driven half-mad by what he had witnessed. Medivh tried to ease his suffering by purging the memories of that day from Moroes's mind. Even so, the poor man was never the same. Neither was Karazhan. It had grown darker, haunted. The spirits of many of the slain humans would wander its halls and grounds for years to come.
While Aegwynn battled Sargeras, more Horde forces poured through the Dark Portal. Garona had accompanied the first scouts who'd gone through the gateway, and she reported back to Gul'dan that the hooded stranger was nowhere to be found. The warlock was furious. He had hoped to gain some clues as to Medivh's true nature; he still believed the mysterious figure was a demon in disguise. As orcs fanned out across the Black Morass, they encountered a few human hunters and traders, but they offered little resistance to the Horde. Most of the humans were killed, but a handful were captured alive. There wasn't much reason for the Horde to question them at first; the orcs could not understand the human tongue. But Garona had a talent for learning new languages, and she spent much of her time speaking with these prisoners. She did not ask them about Stormwind's patrol routes or other military secrets-questions the humans might have resisted answering. However, most of the prisoners were happy to teach their strange captor a few words in exchange for food and water. Still, there was valuable information to be gleaned. One prisoner cursed at the orcs endlessly, telling them they were all doomed to die. He warned that Stormwind had a great mage champion who had single-handedly annihilated a troll army, and that he would make quick work of the green-skinned "beasts" who had taken over the Black Morass. Garona listened to his furious ravings, and she came away with a name and a location: Medivh, who lived in the tower of Karazhan. The Shadow Council assassin set out alone, moving quickly, hoping to inspect the tower without being spotted. She could not have picked a worse time. After the deadly battle inside Karazhan, Medivh was in a dark mood and was extra vigilant for intruders. He captured Garona the moment she stepped within sight of the tower. Garona believed her captor would destroy her, especially when she laid eyes upon Medivh. She did not know that this was the stranger who had
visited Draenor to make a pact with the Horde, but she recognized that there was a great darkness stirring within him. Yet Medivh did not kill her. She had no information he needed, and she was a curiosity. He had not seen her during his visits to Draenor, and he made no mention of those sojourns to her. She was neither truly orc nor truly draenei. Garona was an outcast, and he sympathized with that. What was more, she was remarkably intelligent. Garona could already speak the human tongue fairly well. Medivh taught her new words and phrases. She picked them up quickly. It was clear that Garona was no threat to him, and thanks to Gul'dan's endless cruelty, she had no real love for the Horde. Medivh decided that it would be more valuable to have an ally-or even a friend-among the orcs than another spirit haunting his home. He freed Garona, but he also extended an invitation to her: she could return to Karazhan whenever she liked. Upon reaching the Dark Portal in the Black Morass, Garona told Gul'dan what she had learned. Unbeknownst to her, the warlock already knew what she had seen. Gul'dan had a firm grip on his assassin's mind, and he had been watching through her eyes when she had met Medivh. He had recognized what she had not: Medivh was none other than the mysterious stranger who had come to Draenor. He was a human? That was all? Gul'dan had expected something...more. A disguised Burning Legion commander, perhaps. Gul'dan decided that once Medivh's usefulness had ended, he would kill the mage himself. First, he needed to know the location of the Tomb of Sargeras. He told Garona that Medivh might be holding useful information in his lair. The warlock ordered his assassin to dig up whatever knowledge she could from the mage's tower.
As more and more orcs streamed into Azeroth, reports reached Stormwind of mysterious creatures lurking around the Black Morass. Rumors spread through the streets. Were they vengeful spirits? Trolls, armed with some new breed of power? Had some strange race from across the Great Sea launched a war upon humans? Nothing seemed to make sense. King Llane dispatched Commander Lothar to uncover the truth. He led a small force of knights and scouted out the Black Morass. It was not long before Lothar ran across the Horde. For the first time, orcs clashed with Stormwind's knights, engaging in a series of bloody skirmishes. Lothar's soldiers scored a number of small victories over their foes. Yet for every orc they killed, two more seemed to take their place. The humans found themselves more outnumbered in each subsequent battle, and Lothar was eventually forced to pull back. It shouldn't have been possible. How could the enemy replenish its troops so fast? Lothar and his forces had not yet ventured deep enough into the Black Morass to find the Dark Portal. The region was heavily guarded by their foes. Lothar sent word back to King Llane that the invaders were bringing in reinforcements from somewhere. The kingdom needed to ready itself for a full-scale war. Meanwhile, the orcs reported to Warchief Blackhand, telling him that the region's humans were now aware of their presence. The time for preparation and scouting had ended. The First War was about to begin in earnest.
The battle between Aegwynn and Medivh had gone unnoticed by the rest of the world-a fact that surprised the Guardian. No witnesses had survived with their memories intact, and the deaths of so many nobles had not caused the stir that Medivh had expected. By now, all of the kingdom of Stormwind had heard stories about the barbaric "orcs" flooding out of the Black Morass. Karazhan was not far away; the mysterious disappearance of the nobles was easily laid at the orcs' feet. The Horde's attacks on human settlements had thoroughly occupied the attention of the Council of Tirisfal and the Kirin Tor. The appearance of creatures never seen on this world-corrupted by demonic energies, no less -far outweighed their concerns about someone they saw as a childish, spoiled playboy. Still, the council had not forgotten about the Guardian. Now, more than ever, they wanted him as an ally. They tried to make contact yet again by asking the Kirin Tor to send him one of their own mage apprentices. The young trainee was named Khadgar. He had shown considerable promise in his studies with the Kirin Tor, but the last thing he wanted was to serve under an angry, isolated mage who had thus far driven away all other apprentices. Nevertheless, it was not his choice. The Kirin Tor commanded, and so Khadgar obeyed. Upon starting his apprenticeship, Khadgar had his worst fears confirmed. Karazhan seemed to languish under a shadow of morbidity, and Medivh was subject to frightening mood swings. Worse, the tower appeared to be cursed in some way. Khadgar often caught glimpses of wandering spirits and disturbing visions of the past, present, and future. Yet while other apprentices had failed Medivh's tests, Khadgar did not. The young mage kept his wits about him, even when faced with dangerous tasks. Medivh decided not to reject this new apprentice. It was a risk to keep the young man around, certainly. But Medivh was more alone now than he had ever been, and Khadgar was smart, clever, and hungry to learn.
Medivh revealed to Khadgar what his Kirin Tor masters had not: Medivh was the Guardian. The Council of Tirisfal was worried about him. That was why the Kirin Tor had sent Khadgar as an unwitting spy. Khadgar was surprised but not deterred. In fact, he was intrigued. He had no intention of abandoning his apprenticeship now, not when he could study under a Guardian, the most powerful mage in the world.
Not long after arriving in Karazhan, Khadgar received a strange and foreboding vision. He saw himself as an old, white-haired man, leading troops into battle against green-skinned enemies. He had heard of the orc incursion, but like most others, he didn't know what was true and what was rumor. Yet those creatures in his vision matched the descriptions of orcs that he'd heard. Khadgar told Medivh what he had seen. The Guardian feigned ignorance, saying he knew little about the orcs. He claimed that he had been cooped up in Karazhan for so long that he hadn't heard much about the violence to the south. It was time to remedy that. The two magi rode gryphons over the Black Morass to scout out the region. The sight of the orcs gathering there stunned Khadgar. Their army was immense, and it was growing larger by the minute. An orc warlock spotted the two magi from the ground and unleashed his fel powers on them. Medivh urged Khadgar to destroy their enemy. Khadgar struggled to defeat his foe, and only with the Guardian's help did he finally succeed. Medivh and Khadgar also crossed paths with Lothar. The knight was leading his soldiers on a scouting mission in the region, battling any orcs they came across. Lothar knew that Medivh had been rattled by the power he'd unleashed against the Gurubashi years ago, but he urged the Guardian to rejoin the fray. Stormwind needed him to defeat the orcs. Medivh played along with his old friend's assumptions, telling Lothar he was concerned about tapping into his unwieldy magical powers. The Guardian's true motive was to buy time for the Horde to gain strength, nothing more. Lothar spoke to Khadgar as well, telling him of Medivh's troubled past. He asked the young mage to act not only as his master's apprentice but also as his caretaker. Khadgar did his best, but he quickly became frustrated. After the meeting with Lothar, Medivh became even more erratic than usual. For hours or days at a time, the Guardian would disappear from Karazhan. When he finally
returned, he would be exhausted. What troubled Khadgar even more was when a strange guest arrived at the tower: Garona. The young mage immediately regarded her as an enemy, but Medivh greeted her warmly. He insisted that Khadgar treat Garona with respect. In the days that followed, Khadgar and Garona frequently sparred with words, but they soon developed a bond of friendship. The human came to believe, as Medivh did, that the half-orc was truly willing to turn her back on the Horde. Yet Khadgar eventually realized something deeply troubling. Before their visit to the Black Morass, the Guardian had claimed he didn't know much about the invading orcs. And yet...it was clear he had befriended Garona long before Khadgar began his apprenticeship. Medivh had lied. That small breach of trust would widen over time.
THE TWISTED REALITY OF KARAZHAN
The orcs had begun moving through the Dark Portal en masse. Yet not all clans came to Azeroth. In the years after the Horde conquered the draenei, several clans had lost themselves to bloodlust and madness. These included the mighty Warsongs, the Shattered Hand, and the Bonechewers. Warchief Blackhand had sequestered the overly aggressive clans in different parts of Hellfire Peninsula, where they could do no harm to the rest of the Horde. Blackhand believed that these clans would become liabilities if he allowed them to take part in the invasion of Azeroth. The last thing the Horde needed on a strange new world was to have its own allies attacking other orcs from behind. Blackhand ordered the troublesome clans to remain on Draenor. He knew the idle days would weigh heavy on them. That was good. They would receive only stories of this lush new world, and see only scraps of its spoils. A few months of waiting would force these orcs to be on their best behavior. If they were still uncontrollable, they could stay on Draenor and rot, for all Blackhand cared. Most of the remaining clans streamed through the Dark Portal: the Blackrocks, the Black Tooth Grin, the Bleeding Hollow, the Burning Blade, the Dragonmaw, and the Twilight's Hammer. The Frostwolf clan also came through. Over the past year, Chieftain Durotan had continued questioning Gul'dan's motives and protesting against the use of fel magic. Despite his disgust with the Horde's leadership, he had brought his people through the Dark Portal. There was no future on Draenor; only on Azeroth could they survive another generation. The Frostwolves initially fought against the humans alongside the other clans, but their destiny did not lie with the Horde. Gul'dan later confronted Durotan in secret. The warlock told him that his clan was no longer part of
the Horde and that the Frostwolves had to leave the Black Morass immediately. If they ever returned, if they ever contacted any member of the Horde, Gul'dan promised to destroy every Frostwolf male, female, and child. Durotan was loath to part from his fellow orcs, but he had just learned that his mate, Draka, was pregnant. He did not want to risk her, or their unborn child, by testing Gul'dan's wrath. And he knew why Gul'dan was letting them live-if Durotan were killed, it would make him a martyr and give his warnings weight among the rest of the Horde. Durotan and his clan struck out north. The journey was frightening. Azeroth's terrain was unfamiliar, and Stormwind's humans treated every orc as an enemy. Yet the Frostwolves had an advantage-elemental spirits dwelled on Azeroth, and they were strong. Discovering Azeroth's native spirits shook one of the clan's former shaman, Drek'Thar. It reminded him of the heritage he'd abandoned on Draenor. Drek'Thar renounced his use of fel magic and asked the elements for aid, and he received a small gift. The spirits showed him a path to remote, frost-lined mountains far to the north. It was a climate that was similar in some ways to that of Frostfire Ridge. The clan immediately set out to find these mountains.
The Horde's war of conquest had truly begun. Warchief Blackhand ordered raiding parties to go north and west, cutting deep into Stormwind's lands. There was no more need for secrecy; Blackhand wanted to provoke the humans to anger, believing that these smaller creatures would be ineffective in their fury. Blackhand's first assaults were meant to drive the human populace to panic. Entire villages in Brightwood, Westfall, and the southern Redridge Mountains fell to the Horde, their inhabitants either killed or forced to flee. Whenever Stormwind's patrols rode in to fend off the orcs, they were already gone. They were unlike any enemy the humans had ever faced. Stormwind's leaders understood that the war had entered a new phase. King Llane quickly discarded any thoughts of approaching this fight the way his father, Barathen, had wanted to deal with the trolls. There was no chance of de-escalation. The orcs meant to conquer. King Llane named Lothar the "King's Champion," the highest military rank in the kingdom, and he charged him with ending the orcish threat. Lothar decided to use his enemy's mobility against them. From scouting reports, he saw patterns in the ways the Horde would strike its targets. He set up ambushes along the orcs' paths of retreat, placing large numbers of troops under the command of a loyal knight known as Gavinrad the Dire. Sometimes, small units of these human knights were able to bring down entire orc raiding parties without any casualties. The orcs soon learned that the humans were unlike any enemy they had faced, either. Stormwind's clerics called upon the Holy Light to mend the wounded, while magi wreaked havoc on the Horde with their command of the arcane arts. Though the orcs had encountered these powers when they'd fought the draenei, the humans used their abilities in different ways. Then there were the knights on horseback. The swift and heavily armored soldiers were capable of running down orc raiders and fleeing from ambushes. Faced with these resilient and highly mobile enemies, the orcs were forced to adapt in ways they never had before.
In Stormwind City, King Llane had sounded the alarm. He dispatched messengers to the other human kingdoms, warning them of fearsome greenskinned invaders who had mysteriously appeared in the world. He asked for help, but received none. Llane's reports were not believed by any other leader on the continent. Lordaeron, the nation most likely to offer aid, had received contrary information. A visiting noble from Stormwind had attracted much attention in Lordaeron's court when he openly mocked King Llane, claiming that the fighting was actually a war of rebellion by disgruntled citizens. Lordaeron sent a polite response to Llane, wishing him luck against "whoever was causing him such troubles." No soldiers were dispatched to aid Stormwind. It did not help that Stormwind had developed a reputation for isolationism in recent decades, which many other nations saw as arrogant. The kingdom had prided itself on standing alone. Now it had no choice.
Most of the Horde's attacks were directed north, toward Stormwind. Yet a few raiding parties forged into the western jungles of Stranglethorn Vale. Chieftain Kilrogg Deadeye and his Bleeding Hollow led these efforts-the region reminded them of their ancestral home, and they had aims of claiming it for themselves. Unbeknownst to the orcs, Stranglethorn was Gurubashi territory. Just as when the humans had violated their land years earlier, the trolls united to fight back this new threat. In the thick jungle, the fighting was unspeakably vicious. The trolls knew ways to strike fear into the hearts of their enemies... but so did the Bleeding Hollow. Generations of surviving in a jungle beset by the remnants of the Evergrowth had instilled a savage instinct into the orcs' warfare. Even so, the Bleeding Hollow were at a severe disadvantage. They seemed to outnumber the Gurubashi in every skirmish, but the trolls knew the land too well. They were willing to give up vast swaths of jungle to draw the orcs deeper into Gurubashi territory. The trolls would then launch bloody ambushes from all directions, resulting in horrific losses for the Bleeding Hollow. Had the Gurubashi not been so weakened by their attack on Stormwind- and by Medivh's defense of the city-they might have matched the Horde in strength. Yet the trolls could not muster the numbers to do anything but wage a guerrilla campaign in the jungles. But that was enough. When Warchief Blackhand found out how many orcs were dying in Stranglethorn Vale-for no apparent gain-he ordered the Bleeding Hollow to retreat and join the fight against the humans. The Horde would deal with the troublesome trolls later. The Gurubashi did not pursue the orcs out of the jungle. The trolls remained inside their own territory, ever on alert for another invasion.
Combat against the Horde was a brutal affair for Stormwind. The wounds inflicted by the orcs' mighty weapons could cause a human to bleed out within minutes. One of the great sources of hope on the battlefield was the group of clerics who risked their lives to heal soldiers wounded in combat. The Holy Order of Northshire Clerics had its members accompany every Stormwind patrol and battalion into the fray, just as they had in wars past. These clerics traced their roots to the Church of the Holy Light in Lordaeron. Long ago, they had established the Northshire Abbey in Stormwind and become a critical component of the kingdom. The clerics had been present on the battlefields of various conflicts, including the Gnoll War and the war against the Gurubashi. In some cases, their compassion had even granted them safety on the battlefield. The clerics were known to heal wounded gnolls and trolls in the past. Such was not the case with the Horde. The orcs ruthlessly targeted every cleric they found, knowing that these healers could return a wounded human to battle. Many of the clerics died; without armor or weapons, they could do nothing against the Horde's fury. Despite mounting losses among their ranks, the clerics never hesitated from joining the battle. Their bravery became legendary among Stormwind's forces.
HUMANITY AND THE HOLY LIGHT Sacrifice and courage were among the founding principles of the Church of the Holy Light. The church traced its origins back more than two thousand years ago, all the way to the chaos of the Troll Wars. A human general, Lordain, selflessly gave his life to hold off an overwhelming force of Amani trolls that threatened to destroy a united human army. One of the people he saved was his sister, a renowned warrior named Mereldar. When the war ended, Mereldar dedicated her life to caring for humanity's wounded veterans. It was she who first spoke to other humans about visions of the Light. In her dreams, Mereldar saw five strange forms, not human, thrumming with holy power. They filled her mind with the wisdom of holiness, protection, justice, retribution, and compassion. When she put their wordless teachings into practice, power seemed to flow through her. The patients under her care would see their wounds disappear and their illnesses vanish. Other humans also reported seeing these visions. Mereldar met with them, and together, they codified the radiant wisdom of this higher power into the written word. From the teachings in these books, a religious movement formed. It was based on the tenet of selflessness, and a belief that the Light dwelled in all things. The movement sparked widespread faith in the Holy Light and became the predominant human religion. Centuries later, Lordaeron's leaders codified the different Light-based traditions and belief systems. From these efforts, the Church of the Holy Light came to be. Lordaeron served as the home of this church. It became a popular destination for travelers seeking healing, wisdom, and inner peace. Humans were not the first race on Azeroth to wield the Holy Light. Yet they had a great affinity to it, likely due to their heritage. Humanity traced its origins to the vrykul, half-giants forged by the mythical keepers. The extraordinary keepers had shaped Azeroth, and some of them had
commanded the Holy Light. The church constructed temples and shrines throughout the far-flung human lands, and it created a hierarchy of religious leaders to oversee its followers. The most important places of worship were located in the verdant Eastweald. Among the oldest and most revered of these holy sites were Light's Hope Chapel, Stratholme, Andorhal, and Tyr's Hand.
As the war against Stormwind unfolded in earnest, the Twilight's Hammer clan became a source of irritation for Warchief Blackhand. The clan's warriors were prone to disobey orders, and too many of their number wandered off, never to be seen again. Blackhand considered "making an example" of them and erasing the entire clan from existence. The ogre mage Cho'gall intervened. He had been acting as the Twilight's Hammer's de facto leader, and he offered to become their official chieftain in order to keep them in line. The warchief let him try, and he was pleasantly surprised to discover that Cho'gall was able to end their disciplinary problems almost overnight. The Twilight's Hammer became obedient, effective soldiers, and Blackhand put their past mistakes out of his mind. Cho'gall's success lay with his deep understanding of the Twilight's Hammer and their beliefs. They were a clan attuned to dark energies, a people who worshipped the powers of the Void. The moment they'd arrived on Azeroth, they had heard the Void's call louder and clearer than they ever had. There were creatures of shadow here, terrible beings of chaos and entropy, imprisoned in different locations but still alive and yearning to corrupt Azeroth. The Twilight's Hammer were hearing the whispers of the ancient Old Gods. These beings dwelled in enchanted prisons deep below the earth. Discovering them had overwhelmed the Twilight's Hammer, driving the orcs into a state of sheer ecstasy. This was seen by the clan as a sign of destiny. The Twilight's Hammer had found the place where they belonged-the place where they would bring about the Hour of Twilight. The presence of the Old Gods had a profound impact on Cho'gall. Though he had believed the Void was a powerful force, he had cared little for the Twilight's Hammer's mad ravings about dark gods. Now, he had proof of their existence.
THE OLD GODS Long ago, the void lords launched physical manifestations of their power throughout the universe. These monstrous creatures were known as the Old Gods, and their purpose was to find and corrupt a nascent titan. Most of the void lords' minions failed, but there were a few who almost succeeded. A number of Old Gods landed on ancient Azeroth and began shrouding its sleeping titan spirit in shadow. They enslaved the world's native elementals and lorded over much of the primordial terrain. Before the Old Gods could finish corrupting Azeroth's world-soul, Aggramar and other titans discovered their presence. A cataclysmic war soon raged for control of Azeroth. The titans and their servants narrowly triumphed, and they shackled the Old Gods in tombs beneath the earth. Yet these entities would not stay contained forever. The Old Gods' influence seeped out into the world, and many creatures fell to their control. Perhaps the most powerful of these servants was the black Dragon Aspect, Death wing.
Cho'gall agreed to help the fanatical clan enact its apocalyptic prophecy, and he brought its members under control with one simple notion. He told them that the Hour of Twilight was not far off, and that the Horde's success would be the best way to bring that moment to fruition. Until then, they needed to keep up appearances with Warchief Blackhand
and obey their true masters in secret. The clan agreed. The Old Gods seemed pleased with the Horde's lust for war and destruction, so it was no great sacrifice to proceed with the conquest of the world. As the weeks passed and Cho'gall attuned himself to the Old Gods, he branded the Twilight's Hammer's prophecies onto the skin of Pale orcs. He then cut off their flesh to form pages, creating a book that codified teachings about the Void. This book, the Twilight Canticle, would become a source of power and motivation for the followers of the Old Gods for decades.
While the Horde waged its war, the exiled Frostwolves moved north. They avoided almost all contact with humans thanks to the aid of the elements. Shortly after the Frostwolves arrived at their new home, the Alterac Mountains, Draka gave birth to a boy whom she would name Go'el. This should have been a beautiful moment for Draka and Durotan. Instead, it filled them with horror. Their son's skin was green. He was infected with the orcs' blood-curse. For Durotan, this was the last straw. Gul'dan's pact with his masters had damned the orc race for all generations. He decided he could no longer stand by and do nothing about the dark forces controlling the Horde, no matter the consequences. Neither could Draka. Durotan and Draka told the Frostwolves to remain in the mountains and carve out a new life while they went back to the Horde to reveal the truth. The chieftain, his mate, and their new son, Go'el, made the treacherous journey south. Drek'Thar called on his shamanic powers to send word to Orgrim Doomhammer. The elemental spirits whispered in the Blackrock warrior's dreams, revealing to him that Durotan was coming south and that he wished to meet at the edge of a land known as Loch Modan. Orgrim did not tell Blackhand of the meeting. Like Durotan, Orgrim had become wary of fel magic, Gul'dan, and Warchief Blackhand. He deplored the banishment of the Frostwolf clan, seeing it as further proof that the Horde's leadership was corrupt. He had also learned of the Shadow Council's existence, and he considered the order dishonorable and manipulative. Orgrim pretended to set up a scouting mission and took only a few trusted guards to Loch Modan, where Durotan was waiting. The Frostwolf chieftain showed him Go'el and explained everything he had uncovered: the mysterious warning he had received before the orcs had gathered at the Throne of Kil'jaeden, his theory that Gul'dan was in league with some dark force that was bent on manipulating the Horde-all that he knew. Orgrim was shaken, but he was not entirely surprised. He told Durotan
about something he had seen in recent weeks: the fel energies from Draenor were creeping out from the Dark Portal and into the Black Morass. Soon, this world would be as dead as the one they had come from. Durotan, Draka, and Orgrim agreed that Gul'dan and Blackhand needed to be dealt with at all costs. Orgrim would return to the Horde alone and play along with the leadership's plans for the moment. He urged Durotan and Draka to take shelter in the north until he sent word to them. Orgrim commanded his guards to accompany the Frostwolves on their journey home and keep them safe. That was a mistake Orgrim would regret to his dying day. His guards were not loyal to him, but to the Shadow Council. The guards had heard every word between Orgrim and his visitors. They decided they didn't need Gul'dan's permission to eliminate the Frostwolves -clearly he would want Durotan, Draka, and their child dead. After traveling north for several days, the guards fell upon Durotan and Draka. The Frostwolves fought bitterly against their attackers, killing one of them. But the remaining guards struck down Durotan and Draka, and Go'el was left to die in the frigid cold. Miraculously, the child survived. A day after his parents were murdered, a hunting party led by Aedelas Blackmoore-a human noble from the northern stronghold of Durnholde Keep-came upon the grisly scene. It was rather shocking proof that the war reports out of Stormwind were credible; the dead creatures looked exactly like the descriptions of the beasts known as "orcs." The sound of crying drew Blackmoore's attention, and he found Go'el, starving and freezing but alive. He decided to take him back to Durnholde and have him examined. There was no telling what secrets Blackmoore might glean about his new enemies by observing one of their young. Go'el would spend his entire adolescence under Blackmoore's watchful eye. When a few more days passed and Orgrim's guards hadn't returned, the orc grew suspicious. He sent other warriors north to find out what had happened. These scouts made a grim discovery. Orgrim's friends and one of his "trusted guards" were dead. His scouts took it upon themselves to find the other assassins. They tracked down the Shadow Council servants before they made it back to the Horde lines in the south, and a fierce battle erupted. Orgrim's warriors returned victorious, reporting back to their commander in secret.
It was a stroke of luck. If Gul'dan had heard about Durotan and Orgrim's rebellious intentions, he would have had the Blackrock orc's throat slit in the night. Orgrim was determined to avenge his friends and his people, but he bided his time, waiting for an opportunity.
Over the course of months, the orcs' brutal slash-and-burn raids on the countryside had razed farms, towns, villages, forges, and trade houses. Stormwind's economy was in ruins. More critically, many sources of food either had been destroyed or had fallen into the Horde's hands. Stormwind City's supplies would run dry within a few months. Knowing this, Warchief Blackhand initiated the next phase of his war. He would bring the Horde north and conquer a region called the Redridge Mountains. From there, the orcs would then launch an invasion into Stormwind City itself. The foothills of Redridge fell to the Horde with little resistance. It was so easy, the orcs believed the humans would not challenge them at all before they reached Stormwind City. That was exactly what Commander Lothar hoped they would think.
STORMWIND AND HORDE TERRITORIES DURING THE FIRST WAR Blackhand led a small orc raiding party into the mountains, seeking to claim the township of Lakeshire as a Horde stronghold. Without warning, Lothar and his knights roared down the slopes, surrounding the orcs in an expertly executed ambush. The Horde raiders fought hard, but nearly every one of them died in the attack. Lothar almost collected Blackhand's head that day as well, but the warchief was accompanied by two Shadow Council warlocks. Their fel fire turned the tide of battle, forcing Lothar to retreat before he could draw Blackhand's blood. Blackhand and the other survivors limped back to the Horde encampments. In the coming weeks, a much larger force would go on to take Lakeshire and the surrounding land. Blackhand had little gratitude for the warlocks who had
saved his life. His brush with death had humiliated him. He blamed the Shadow Council for not sensing the impending ambush, and he personally executed the two warlocks for incompetence. Gul'dan was less than pleased by this development. The warlocks were his subordinates to discipline, and he did not have an unlimited supply of them to spare. Blackhand ignored Gul'dan's anger. As warchief, he was above being questioned.
The ambush on Blackhand gave Gul'dan something to think about. He had seen that humans would fight hard when outnumbered, and he suspected that a siege of Stormwind City would be more difficult than the Horde believed. Though the orcs had destroyed Shattrath City, that had been under much different circumstances. The Horde was now divided-some of its most powerful clans still remained on Draenor. Years of war, famine, and hunger had also weakened the armies. What was more, Gul'dan had learned about Medivh's defense of Stormwind City against the Gurubashi trolls in years past. He had also discovered fragments of knowledge about the history of the Guardian and the Council of Tirisfal. All of this only deepened the mysteries surrounding Medivh. Was he sincere in wanting the Horde to conquer Azeroth? Was he truly a puppet of the Burning Legion? Or did he have some ulterior motive in mind? If so, Medivh might find a reason to wipe out the orcs just as he had done to the Gurubashi. Gul'dan recalled how he had empowered the Horde before its conquest of Karabor: he had broken the world's elements and infused their energies into the orcs. Azeroth teemed with elemental spirits, and they were much stronger than those on Draenor. Shadow Council spies reported sensing massive elemental activity to the northwest of Redridge, near a smoldering volcano called Blackrock Mountain. Cho'gall confirmed those reports, but he kept some information to himself. Not only did the two-headed ogre sense elemental power in the mountain, but he had also discovered that the local spirits were in league with the Old Gods. The Shadow Council secretly traveled to Blackrock Mountain, planning to subjugate its inhabitants. It was a disaster. No orc had ever dealt with this level of raw elemental might on Draenor. The first few Shadow Council warlocks who tried dominating the elements faced a grim fate: they were burned from the inside out by gouts of flame. Deep beneath Blackrock Mountain lived Ragnaros, the elemental lord of
fire. He commanded innumerable lesser elementals as well as an entire nation of mortal slaves. For centuries, the Dark Iron dwarves had served as Ragnaros's loyal subjects. Whenever a warlock tried to trespass too deep into the mountain, the Dark Irons would attack, their forces bolstered by raging fire elementals. Before the Shadow Council incited Ragnaros and his minions to all-out war, Cho'gall mediated peace. His fledgling connection to the Old Gods allowed him access to the mountain's depths, and after extensive conversations with the Dark Iron dwarves and Ragnaros's elemental lieutenants, an accord was reached. The Old Gods were delighted with the work the Horde was doing, and they wanted to help, but they had no intention of giving even a scrap of power to Burning Legion puppets like the orcs. After all, Sargeras and his armies stood in direct opposition to the powers of the Void. Yet they did grant the Shadow Council a small refuge-called Blackrock Spire-high in the mountain. If the warlocks remained there, they would not be disturbed by Ragnaros or his followers. Gul'dan was disappointed that his quest to seize the mountain's power had failed, but he was pleased that Cho'gall had proved to be such an effective diplomat. Had he known about the ogre mage's true motives and his newfound reverence for the Old Gods, he might not have been so glad. Yet for now, a secret haven was something the Shadow Council desperately needed. Tensions between Blackhand and Gul'dan were rising. A refuge was a priceless thing. The mountain's power could wait until later.
Brightwood, Westfall, and the Redridge Mountains were now under Horde control. The time to strike at Stormwind City had come. Warchief Blackhand scoffed when Gul'dan told him his mission to Blackrock Mountain was a failure; he had expected nothing less. He was prepared to crush Stormwind City without the help of borrowed elemental power. Thousands of Horde soldiers flooded through Elwynn Forest and established siege lines outside Stormwind City. They encircled the stronghold, cutting off all access except for the sea. Blackhand ordered Kilrogg and Cho'gall to lead the Bleeding Hollow and Twilight's Hammer clans in an assault against Stormwind. To soften the city's defenses, the Horde bombarded the walls with siege engines through the night. At dawn, Kilrogg and Cho'gall launched their attack. Orcs charged the battlements, while warlocks engulfed Stormwind's soldiers in fel fire. The losses among the city's defenders were staggering. It seemed to Blackhand that Stormwind would fall by midday. No one was more astonished than him to hear cries of an attack on the Horde's rear lines. Lothar had led the lion's share of Stormwind's knights around the Horde by sea, and he was now leading a charge through Elwynn Forest. The orcs in the rearguard were caught utterly by surprise, and the knights carved a massive gash into their lines. The Horde attack soon collapsed. The Bleeding Hollow and the Twilight's Hammer broke off their aggression and tried to push back the knights. Stormwind's enormous gates opened, and soldiers poured out of the city in a counterattack, acting as a hammer to Lothar's anvil. The orcs had no way to fight off the two-pronged assault. They could only run. It was the biggest disaster the Horde had ever suffered. The defeat infuriated Blackhand. He barely restrained himself from executing Kilrogg and Cho'gall, but only because he suspected their clan members would revolt. The Horde withdrew to its holdings in Redridge to draw up a new plan of
conquest.
Stormwind's victory over the Horde had not been a matter of luck. Lothar and King Llane had been acting on very specific information. Many of the Horde's battle plans had been provided by Khadgar, who had learned them from Garona. Gul'dan knew that Garona was revealing information to her human friends about orcish culture and the Horde's movements, but he did not order her to stay away from Karazhan. The details Gul'dan had learned through her about Medivh and his mysterious home were too valuable to give up, despite the risk posed to the orcs' war effort. Garona and Khadgar conversed frequently when they were together in Karazhan, especially about their growing concerns for Medivh. In recent months, Karazhan had become darker and more twisted. Tormented spirits floated through the hallways in greater numbers than ever before. From time to time, Khadgar and Garona were subjected to vivid, horrific visions of the past, present, and future. Khadgar suspected this was all due to Medivh. The Guardian's mood swings had vanished entirely. That was a relief, but only at first; his rage had disappeared, but it seemed to have been replaced with nothing at all. It was as if Medivh had simply lost the ability to feel anything. As he withdrew from his humanity, the fabric of reality in Karazhan seemed to unravel. Khadgar searched through the books in the tower's libraries, desperate to find any clue that would explain what was happening. An obscure tome seemed to hold answers. There was an ancient technique that allowed a skilled mage to evoke visions of specific memories. Unfortunately, the spell proved unreliable. Khadgar was rarely able to summon a vision of the moment he wanted, and questions about Medivh did not work at all. After much trial and error, Khadgar decided to use the spell in a different manner. Perhaps he could see the origin of the rift connecting Azeroth with the orcish homeworld. This latest effort succeeded, but the answers it provided were almost beyond belief.
Both Khadgar and Garona watched in horror as a new vision unfolded around them. They saw a mysterious stranger confronting Gul'dan on Draenor. The hooded man convinced the Shadow Council to create the Dark Portal and invade Azeroth by showing that the world was ripe for plunder. Then they saw the stranger's face up close; it was none other than Medivh. The person who had unleashed the Horde upon Azeroth was the Guardian of Tirisfal.
Scarcely had the troubling vision faded when Medivh learned of what Khadgar and Garona had discovered. The half-orc and the human narrowly escaped the Guardian's wrath. They fled to Stormwind City, hoping to warn King Llane and Lothar of Medivh's treason. Khadgar insisted that Garona be allowed to enter the city, and she accompanied him when he met with the king. Gul'dan was watching through her eyes, and when he realized she was in the same room as Stormwind's ruler, he tried to compel her to murder Llane. Garona resisted the strange urge to commit violence, not realizing that it was coming from the warlock. Llane could not believe that Medivh was responsible for such treachery, but Lothar did. He trusted Khadgar. As hard as it was to admit, he knew now that Medivh was a great threat to Azeroth, even more so than the Horde. Lothar charged the knight Gavinrad with commanding Stormwind City's defenses. Then he led a war party to Karazhan, accompanied by Garona and Khadgar. With a heavy heart, Lothar vowed to capture or kill his childhood friend. Observing this all through Garona's eyes, Gul'dan panicked. He had not yet found the location of the Tomb of Sargeras, and he could not allow Medivh to die before he learned it. As Lothar and his allies arrived at Karazhan and began their attack, Gul'dan reached out to the Guardian's mind. At first, Medivh's mental defenses were too strong to penetrate. Yet as the battle commenced, he grew distracted. Gul'dan frantically rummaged through the Guardian's memories, searching for any useful information. Just as he had done during the fight with Aegwynn, Sargeras assumed control over the Guardian's thoughts and actions. He unleashed the full might of his powers on the intruders. The battle at Karazhan was a maelstrom of fire, steel, and magic. Garona's mind was assailed by the Guardian's spells- Sargeras tried to take control of Gul'dan's mental chains and use Garona against her allies, but it was only partially effective. Confusion rippled through the half-orc. She soon found it impossible to differentiate between
friend and foe. Khadgar was nearly killed in the assault; Sargeras tried to rip his soul from his body, and when that failed, he drained part of his life force. The apprentice was prematurely aged, a young man who had become old and wizened. In the end, it was Khadgar who buried a blade in his mentor's chest, fatally wounding him. Striking down the Guardian forced Sargeras's spirit from his body, banishing the Legion's lord into the depths of the Twisting Nether. In Medivh's last moments, his thoughts became clear for the first time in his life. The full realization of what he had done, of the untold deaths he had caused, pressed down on him. He had utterly failed as Guardian, but Khadgar and his allies had accomplished what Medivh could not. They had defeated Sargeras and thwarted his plans. Medivh's last words were of thanks-he had only gratitude for Khadgar, Lothar, and their companions. Garona was not there to see Medivh draw his last breath. She had already fled Karazhan. No one knew where she had gone, and there was no time to search for her. It had been many centuries since a Guardian had died in combat, and never before had one been possessed by demonic power. Medivh's death had drastic consequences. Fel energy exploded outward from the tower of Karazhan, turning the surrounding land into a dangerous, thorny blight. The region west of the tower-Brightwood-would become known as Duskwood. There were repercussions for the Horde as well. Gul'dan had succeeded in finding what he wanted-he now knew the location of the Tomb of Sargeras. Yet when Medivh was defeated, the warlock had still been scouring his memories for information. The shock of the Guardian's death slammed into Gul'dan's mind and threw him into a deep coma.
RELICS OF POWER When Gul'dan was prying into Medivh's thoughts, he learned more than just the Tomb of Sargeras's location. The orc also gleaned valuable knowledge about Azeroth's history and artifacts of magical power that lay scattered throughout the world.
Far from Karazhan, Gul'dan's sudden coma sent shockwaves through the Shadow Council. They did not understand what had happened or why. Warchief Blackhand was also confused, but not terribly unhappy. He had not been pleased with the Shadow Council's recent efforts, and he knew that Gul'dan had been trying to assert more and more control over the Horde. Orgrim Doomhammer believed that his time had come. The Shadow Council was in disarray, and Blackhand was still reeling from the recent failed attack on Stormwind City. Orgrim would have no better chance to erase the corruption that had damned the orc people. He challenged Blackhand to a mak'gora, a duel to the death, calling the warchief a traitor who had sold his people into servitude to dark forces. It was not a challenge Blackhand could refuse. No orc could, not without losing the Horde's respect. He could not even have Orgrim assassinated in secret-Blackhand had relied on the Shadow Council for such tasks. Painted with clan symbols and adorned in oil, the two orcs dueled for hours. Orgrim ended the contest when he crushed Blackhand's skull with his family's weapon, the Doomhammer. The watching orcs kneeled before the victor, proclaiming their new leader Warchief Doomhammer. Orgrim spoke to the Horde, telling them that Gul'dan and his warlocks were not what they seemed. Their fel powers were what had killed Draenor. Orgrim declared that he would cleanse the Horde of the foul darkness that had poisoned it. His first step was to outlaw the practice of using fel magic, on pain of death. Azeroth would not suffer Draenor's fate. Yet the full measure of Orgrim's vengeance would have to wait. After Blackhand's death, the Shadow Council had fled. Orgrim did not know where they had run to. For now, Orgrim focused his attention on the war with Stormwind. He did not relish the prospect of more battle, but he had no choice. To return to Draenor meant a slow death. The only way the orcs would survive was by
conquering Stormwind and making it their new home. If they did not defeat their enemies, they would be at the mercy of a strange world. Warchief Doomhammer ordered the clans to prepare for one final assault. They were moving before the sun had set.
Warchief Doomhammer would take no chances with the second attack on Stormwind City. He unleashed the full might of the Horde against the stronghold. He had briefly considered calling on the Warsongs, the Shattered Hand, and other clans that were still on Draenor to reinforce them, but there was no time. Every day that passed was another day that Stormwind had to regroup. As the battle commenced, both sides knew that this day would decide the fate of Stormwind. There would be no quarter, no mercy, and no retreat. The Horde breached the city's walls and stormed into the streets, but Stormwind's defenders held them at bay. At least, for a time. King Llane was convening with his military commanders in Stormwind's keep when he received word that Garona had arrived from Karazhan. Lothar and Khadgar were still gone, and the king was worried about their fate. Eager to learn what had happened, Llane allowed Garona into his presence. She was going to tell him about the battle with Medivh. Before she could, something snapped in her mind. She had resisted Gul'dan's order to kill King Llane before, but her encounter with the Guardian had scrambled her thoughts. The line between friend and foe blurred. Her willpower faltered. The warlock's old command to kill the king flared bright in her mind. Deep down, she had no wish to slay Llane, a stranger who had welcomed her into his kingdom, who had treated her with more respect in recent months than the orcs had shown her in a lifetime. Yet she could no longer disobey Gul'dan's order. With tears streaming down her face, she plunged a dagger into Llane's heart. The young prince, Varian, witnessed the murder. His father's assassination deeply impacted the boy, and it would forever taint his perception of the orcs; he would view them as a deceitful and murderous
people. In the confusion that followed, Garona escaped the keep, vanishing into the chaos of battle. Word of the king's death spread quickly, and morale faltered. Fighting engulfed nearly every corner of Stormwind. The Horde's continuing barrage set fire to the city. That was when Lothar and Khadgar returned from Karazhan. They saw the chaos, and when they learned the king was dead, Lothar took command of the remaining forces. There was nothing left to be done for his city. He could only save as many of its people as he could. Lothar ordered a mass evacuation of the city. He, Khadgar, Gavinrad, and the remaining soldiers gathered Prince Varian and his mother, Queen Taria, along with any other citizens they could find. They fought street by street to Stormwind's harbor, losing many on the way. Among the casualties was Taria. When Lothar and the other survivors finally reached the docks, before they set sail, they destroyed nearly all of the city's remaining boats so that the Horde could not follow. Stormwind City burned to the ground behind the refugees. The First War was over. The Horde stood victorious. But its warchief was anything but happy.
LOTHAR AND OTHER REFUGEES FLEE STORMWIND
Warchief Doomhammer had no means-nor the inclination-to pursue Stormwind's refugees. The Horde had taken heavy losses to achieve victory, and he knew he needed to secure his conquered land before facing any new enemies. He sent messengers back to Draenor to call up the remaining clans. The Warsongs, the Shattered Hand, the Laughing Skull, the Thunderlords, and the Bonechewers would need time to reach the Horde's new territory. Orgrim used that time to consolidate his control of the Horde. His first priority was eradicating the Shadow Council. Though it was a powerful force, it was the root of the Horde's corruption. Orgrim believed that the Shadow Council was in league with dark forces that were manipulating the orcs, and that the warlocks' obsession with fel magic was what had killed Draenor. On a more personal level, Orgrim also wanted revenge. Members of the Shadow Council had murdered Durotan, Draka, and their infant child (as far as Orgrim was aware). The Shadow Council's whereabouts were unknown. Luckily, there was someone to interrogate. Gul'dan was still unconscious, but the Horde had captured his puppet, Garona, as she tried to escape from Stormwind City. Orgrim had her tortured until she revealed where the Shadow Council had built its secret refuge: Blackrock Spire. A large force of Horde soldiers stormed the smoldering volcano. No fire elementals or Dark Iron dwarves barred their way. Ragnaros and the Old Gods kept their presence hidden, eager to see how the violent situation would play out. The Shadow Council warlocks could do little to save themselves. Their fel power could only delay Orgrim's wrath for so long, and they fell before the
warchief's loyal followers. One of the few council members to survive was Cho'gall. The ogre made a very convincing case for why he should be spared. Without Cho'gall, the Twilight's Hammer would succumb to madness again. Could Orgrim really afford to lose such a capable fighting force? Cho'gall swore his allegiance to the warchief, claiming that he had been manipulated into Gul'dan's service. Orgrim accepted his surrender reluctantly. He wasn't sure whether the twoheaded ogre was telling the truth, and he didn't particularly care. He needed fighting power to protect the Horde's new lands. Cho'gall also proved his usefulness when he introduced Orgrim to the Dark Iron dwarves who lived deep within the mountain. The rapport between the ogre and these creatures was an unexpected advantage. The dwarves agreed-at Ragnaros's secret command-to allow the Horde to claim Blackrock Spire as its new headquarters. The Old Gods were delighted to see what chaos the orcs would sow on Azeroth in the coming years. The warchief also spared Garona's life. It was no secret that Gul'dan had been remarkably cruel to her, and her assassination of Llane had been very helpful. She, too, swore fealty to the Horde. Orgrim charged one of his most trusted lieutenants, Eitrigg, to act as her handler. In time, Orgrim's messengers returned from Draenor with bad news. The clans still on that world had descended deeper into bloodlust and had begun fighting with one another. Only a few skilled, disciplined orcs and a handful of ogres would be able to bolster the Horde. It wasn't what Orgrim had been hoping to hear, but it was what he had to deal with. And soon, he would control a source of power that he could have never imagined, a weapon born from Azeroth's ancient past...
Throughout the First War, Azeroth's mighty dragons were largely absent from the conflict. For many ages, these majestic creatures had protected the world under the guidance of the five Dragon Aspects: Alexstrasza, Neltharion, Nozdormu, Ysera, and Malygos. Yet they were no longer capable of safeguarding the world. They were still reeling from a betrayal millennia old. Ten thousand years ago, during the War of the Ancients, the Aspects had joined the fight against the Burning Legion. Alexstrasza, Nozdormu, Ysera, and Malygos had willingly sacrificed a portion of their essence into a singular artifact that would channel their fury together. This weapon was known as the Dragon Soul, and it would be capable of annihilating Azeroth's demonic enemies. Only Neltharion did not infuse the artifact with his power. He had crafted the weapon and presented it to his allies. On the surface, his intentions seemed pure. Yet, in truth, they were anything but noble. Unbeknownst to the other Aspects, Neltharion had fallen under the influence of the Old Gods. After the other Aspects empowered the Dragon Soul, Neltharion wielded the artifact in battle. He destroyed scores of demons with the weapon, but he was not content to focus his wrath solely on the Legion. Neltharion also turned the Dragon Soul against his friends and allies. This shocking betrayal broke the unity of dragonkind, and it earned Neltharion a new name: Deathwing. The other Dragon Aspects eventually recovered the artifact from their brother. They were troubled to find that they could not destroy or reclaim the power they had infused into the weapon. The Aspects had little choice but to hide the Dragon Soul in a place where no one would think to look: a remote corner of the world that would become known as the Redridge Mountains. Enchantments were also placed upon the artifact, preventing Deathwing or any other dragon from ever touching it. In the millennia that followed, the weakened Dragon Aspects largely
retreated from the world. Deathwing's betrayal had changed them forever. The bronze Dragon Aspect, Nozdormu, occupied himself with the ancient task of safeguarding the past, present, and future. He rarely emerged from the swirling timeways. The green Aspect, Ysera, spent much of her time monitoring the health of Azeroth's wilds from the Emerald Dream. The blue Dragon Aspect, Malygos, had lost himself to madness due to Deathwing's actions, and he secluded himself inside his lair, the Nexus. The red Dragon Aspect, Alexstrasza, did intervene in the activities of the world's mortal races, but only rarely. She also kept watch for any sign of Deathwing. After the War of the Ancients, Deathwing had disappeared and settled into a deep slumber. The Dragon Soul had been too much for even the corrupted Dragon Aspect to wield in battle, and the artifact's power had nearly destroyed him. He had been forced to attach metal plates to his spine to keep his fiery body from tearing apart. Deathwing needed time to recover from his wounds and regain his strength. During his long slumber, the other dragonflights hunted his corrupted children to the brink of extinction. The incredible amount of magic that was used to open the Dark Portal finally roused Deathwing. He watched with fascination as Stormwind and the Horde fought, and he became convinced that the orcs might be the means by which he could restore his wounded black dragonflight to its full glory. Deathwing knew that more than just the other Dragon Aspects would oppose him if he ever came out of hiding; many of the mortal races would as well. If the Horde could break Azeroth's kingdoms-eliminating some of the strongest cultures in the world-it would allow Deathwing to devote his full attention to fending off his fellow Aspects. During the First War, Deathwing's Old God masters had urged him to take small steps to aid the orcs. Nothing too drastic, of course, for he did not want to attract the attention of the other dragonflights. Yet the Old Gods saw Deathwing's intervention as a way to engulf the world in chaos. The first thing he had done was to take on the guise of a human noble from Stormwind. He had visited Lordaeron and charmed the aristocracy with gossip. When stories of the Horde's invasion finally reached their kingdom, Deathwing openly scoffed at them. He told Lordaeron's upper society that the tales were fabrications meant to hide growing problems with human rebels. His lies were far more believable than the desperate pleas for help
from Stormwind. To win over those who stubbornly believed the reports from Stormwind, Deathwing turned to his sorcerous abilities. He subtly influenced the minds of Lordaeron's nobles, preventing them from taking any action against the Horde. Once he was certain that Lordaeron would send no aid against the Horde, Deathwing had moved south. Taking on the form of a Blackrock orc, he had examined the orcs' society from the inside, living as one of them for months. It had been easy for him to sense the hidden power driving the Horde's actions, and before long, he had maneuvered himself into the good graces of various individuals. Gul'dan believed he was a loyal follower; Blackhand believed he was a proud Blackrock orc; even Orgrim Doomhammer believed he was a stalwart ally. In the end, Warchief Blackhand had fallen to Orgrim, but that was not an issue. The Shadow Council served the Legion, and Deathwing served the Old Gods. Shattering the Legion's hold on the orcs only made them more vulnerable to his masters. There remained only one problem. The Horde had been weakened by the First War. If the rest of the human kingdoms were to unite, the orcs would not have the means to destroy them. Even if they could, they would surely awaken too many enemies. If the other Dragon Aspects became aware of the threat the Horde posed, the orcs would not stand a chance. Yet the Dragon Soul was still out there. Because it contained power from all of the Aspects except for Deathwing, it could be used against them, for the purpose of either destruction or control. No dragon could wield the artifact... but the orcs could. They would make very convenient allies. Deathwing granted visions to one of the clan chieftains. He had learned much about the Horde and its ways, and he believed that Zuluhed, leader of the Dragonmaw, would be most receptive. Zuluhed was bombarded with vivid dreams of his clan taming and riding strange, powerful winged creatures. In the human tongue, these beasts were called dragons. It was an intoxicating sight-the heritage of the Dragonmaw had been to tame rylaks on Draenor, to make them nelghor, "loyal beasts." To once again soar in the sky was an idea that could not be resisted. If properly tamed and broken, these dragons would make excellent nelghor.
THE BLUE DRAGONFLIGHT During the War of the Ancients, Deathwing's betrayal had killed nearly every blue dragon in existence. The entire flight would have gone extinct if not for the actions of Alexstrasza and her dragons. They gathered the remaining blue dragon eggs and did what they could to hatch and raise new whelps. For a time, some of Alexstrasza's followers also safeguarded magical artifacts and places of power on Azeroth. The task was normally reserved for blue dragons, but with the flight in disarray, there was no one else left to fulfill their ancient duties.
Once the hook was set, Deathwing coaxed Zuluhed to the Redridge Mountains. Hidden deep beneath the mountains, protected by wards, and guarded by a red dragon named Orastrasz was a featureless gold disc. This was the Dragon Soul, untouched since it was buried millennia ago. Zuluhed and his clan immediately fell upon Orastrasz. They had never faced a red dragon in battle before. Over a dozen orcs perished in the fight, but they succeeded in killing the guardian. Zuluhed then ordered his clan's greatest warlock, Nekros Skullcrusher, to recover the artifact. The orc shattered the relic's defenses. He sensed faint fel energies on it-a remnant of its use in the War of the Ancients-and he renamed it the Demon Soul. Far from the Redridge Mountains, Alexstrasza sensed the breaking of the
artifact's wards. When she heard no word from the relic's guardian, she grew concerned. Alexstrasza took several of her red dragons and hurried south. They believed that some foolish mortal had somehow stolen the artifact, and that Orastrasz was in the midst of trying to hunt it. They thought it would be easy to help him retrieve it. In truth, they were flying into Deathwing's trap.
As Lothar and Stormwind's refugees fled north, word of the city's destruction spread to other nations. Lordaeron's ruler, King Terenas Menethil II, was deeply shaken by the news. It had been difficult to sift fact from rumor. At first, the king had not even believed that the orcs were real. Now he knew they were a grave threat. When Stormwind's survivors finally arrived in Lordaeron, Lothar told Terenas of the Horde's true might. He urged the king to gather the other human nations immediately. Without unity, he argued, the Horde would have no difficulty picking off each kingdom one by one. In time, the leaders of all the human nations gathered in Lordaeron's Capital City. There had not been such a gathering in recent memory. Joining Terenas and Lothar were King Genn Greymane of Gilneas, Lord Admiral Daelin Proudmoore of Kul Tiras, Archmage Antonidas of Dalaran, King Thoras Trollbane of Stromgarde, and King Aiden Perenolde of Alterac. This occasion was deemed the Council of Seven Nations. At the outset, unity seemed to be a distant dream. Terenas called upon his fellow rulers to join together and form an unstoppable Alliance of human nations, one that would eradicate the threat of the Horde and reclaim Stormwind for its survivors. There was some interest. Archmage Antonidas, representing Dalaran's Kirin Tor, had heard firsthand accounts of the Horde from Khadgar. Proudmoore was friends with Anduin Lothar, and he believed that vengeance on behalf of a destroyed human nation was the correct course of action. Trollbane had a close relationship with Lordaeron, and he, too, was willing to fight. Yet Gilneas and Alterac were not so easily convinced. They openly expressed suspicion about whether creatures from another world had invaded at all; Deathwing's rumors had spread far beyond Lordaeron. They believed there must be some other explanation. While the Council of Seven Nations continued its meetings, the Horde
prepared for war.


As the dust of the First War settled, Orgrim Doomhammer mulled over the future of his people. He dreamed of a time when the orcs could return to their old traditions and ways, free from fel magic and the other corruptive influences that Gul'dan and Blackhand had introduced to the clans. Yet that dream would be long in coming. First, Orgrim would have to secure a home for the orcs on Azeroth. Conquering Stormwind was not enough. The other human nations would never make peace with the Horde. Not after Stormwind's destruction. Even now, Doomhammer's scouts reported that there was a gathering of human nations in a northern land called Lordaeron. Orgrim knew that the Horde could not sit idle. If he and his people simply tried to defend their conquered territory, the human nations would muster the full might of their armies, march south, and eventually overrun the orcs. The only way for Orgrim to secure his race's survival was to strike first, before his enemies could fully prepare for war. After interrogating human prisoners taken from Stormwind, the orcs had learned that many powerful human
nations existed in the north, but none compared to Lordaeron. It was the heart of human culture. If the Horde conquered its seat of power, Capital City, Doomhammer believed the other kingdoms would fall in turn. But that was if the Horde conquered Lordaeron's capital. The war with Stormwind had depleted Doomhammer's army and sapped its resources. With only meager reinforcements coming from Draenor, the warchief sought other ways to strengthen the Horde. His followers scrambled to find new weapons. Blackrock orcs commandeered Stormwind's forges, but many of them were in ruins due to the fire that had raged through the city. The Dragonmaw orcs had discovered a strange and mighty artifact known as the Demon Soul. Yet thus far, they had not unlocked its potential. The clan's leader, Zuluhed, had given the Demon Soul to his second-in-command, Nekros, and tasked him with unraveling its secrets. The Horde had also befriended Azeroth's fearsome Amani trolls. They had a long and bitter history of conflict with humans, and they had rejoiced upon learning of Stormwind's destruction. The Amani saw the orcs as potential allies. Some of them indicated that they would join the Horde in exchange for Doomhammer's aid. The Amani ruler, Warlord Zul'jin, had been captured by humans and shackled in a prison near the town of Hillsbrad. If the orcs helped them liberate Zul'jin, these trolls would agree to fight for the Horde. Then there was Gul'dan. Not long after Stormwind's fall, the disgraced warlock had stirred from his coma. The warchief had kept Gul'dan under watch, intending to execute him when he woke. Yet when the time came to shed his blood, Orgrim stayed his hand. Gul'dan had an offer for his new master, a means to ensure the Horde's victory over the humans.
Gul'dan awakened from his coma to find that the world had changed. Before, he had commanded immense power over the Horde. Now, he had none. His Shadow Council was destroyed, and Doomhammer was the new warchief. Gul'dan knew that if he did not win Orgrim's trust, he would meet the same grisly fate as his warlocks. Gul'dan pleaded for his life, and he pledged his loyalty to the Horde. The warlock promised Doomhammer that he would no longer seek to manipulate the orcs. He disavowed his connection with the benefactors who had taught the orcs fel magic, claiming that they had betrayed and abandoned him. The warlock knew that his word was worth little more than dirt to Orgrim. He needed something more to win the warchief's trust. Gul'dan saw that the Horde was desperate for power. Without it, the orcs would fail in the coming war against the humans. He told Doomhammer that he could create new warriors, ones who could stand toe-to-toe with humanity's spellcasters. Clerics and magi had proved to be troublesome opponents in the First War. From what human prisoners had told the orcs, nations like Lordaeron incorporated far more of these spellcasters into their armies than Stormwind had. Doomhammer didn't trust Gul'dan, but the warlock was right. The Horde had no answer to human magic, especially after the warchief had outlawed the use of fel energy. The draenei had wielded similar abilities to those of the humans, but the armies of Lordaeron and the other northern nations were far greater in number. Orgrim gave Gul'dan a chance to prove his worth. If he could produce something useful, he would live. If he could not, the warchief himself would be the one to end his miserable existence. Orgrim knew that leaving Gul'dan alive was a risk, but he believed that he could control the warlock rather than become his accomplice and puppet as Blackhand had. Having forestalled his execution, Gul'dan entertained the thought of murdering Doomhammer. He abandoned his scheme when a familiar voice whispered to him-the voice of Kil'jaeden.
After years of silence, Sargeras had commanded Kil'jaeden to reconnect with his servant. The demon lord told Gul'dan to leave Doomhammer in charge of the Horde. He had sacked Stormwind, accomplishing what even Blackhand had failed to do. He was a leader the Legion needed-a leader who could conquer Azeroth's defenders. Kil'jaeden ordered Gul'dan to do whatever he could to help strengthen the Horde and ensure that it completed its goal. Once again, the demon lord promised the warlock power if he followed the Legion's will. Kil'jaeden had every intention of making good on his promise, but Gul'dan did not trust him. He had grown tired of serving as the Legion's pawn. Though Gul'dan feigned obedience to the demon lord, he plotted betrayal. He now knew the Tomb of Sargeras's location. He could seize the power within the tomb for himself. What need did he have of Kil'jaeden or the Legion? To reach the tomb, Gul'dan would require loyal allies. He would need an army to protect him from the Horde's inevitable wrath when it learned of his intentions. Gul'dan convinced Doomhammer to grant him permission to form his own clan, the Stormreavers. The warlock claimed that he would keep his activities visible to the entire Horde, unlike when he had ruled over the Shadow Council and shrouded himself in secrecy. He and his clan members would be forced to fight on the front lines alongside the rest of the army. In truth, Gul'dan planned to use the new clan as a means to expand his influence and power. Doomhammer suspected as much, but he was confident he could stay one step ahead of Gul'dan. If the warlock wanted a clan of his own, so be it. Orgrim would plant spies among the clan to keep watch on Gul'dan and his activities. There was another reason for Orgrim's decision. Opinion among the orcs had turned against Gul'dan and his use of fel magic, and no clan would accept him or his followers into its ranks. If the warlock was to make an impact in the war, he would need a clan of his own.
Gul'dan contemplated many ways to deliver on his promise of making new warriors. It was paramount that they secretly pledge their loyalty to him, and so the warlock turned to his Shadow Council. Though its members were dead, their spirits remained intact. If Gul'dan could bring them back from the grip of death, he believed they would be forever grateful to him. Gul'dan and Cho'gall gathered the Shadow Council's disembodied spirits and searched for a way to place them into physical shells. The warlock considered using the bodies of orcs-or even ogres-who had fallen in the First War. Yet he knew that the Horde would never stand for such desecration of its honored dead. It would cause an uproar among the clans and lead to swift retribution against Gul'dan. No, orcs and ogres were out of the question, but humans were not. Gul'dan would meld the Shadow Council's spirits with the corpses of Stormwind's greatest knights. Because fel magic had been outlawed, Gul'dan would transform these soldiers into powerful necromancers. He and Cho'gall conducted bloody ritual after bloody ritual to complete their work. After a series of bitter failures, they finally succeeded. Gul'dan fused the spirit of his old ally Teron'gor to the corpse of a fallen Stormwind knight. Necromantic energies surged through the rotting body and raised it into undeath. This shambling skeletal horror became known as Teron Gorefiend. He was the first of what Gul'dan would call the death knights.
FATE OF THE NECROLYTES The orc necrolytes had been an interesting experiment, but they did not prove as effective in combat as Gul'dan had hoped. In the end, he did find a good use for them. Gul'dan and Cho 'gall sacrificed the necrolytes, using their necromantic energies to reanimate the death knights.
These soldiers of darkness were the ultimate successors to warlocks. They had no need of food or rest. The death knights could summon necromantic energies to rip the life from their enemies and even raise the dead as reinforcements on the battlefield. Having perfected his techniques, Gul'dan forged more death knights. The sight of them sickened Orgrim. They were unnatural abominations, and they had been created from the fallen members of the Shadow Council, the very organization that Orgrim saw as responsible for killing the orcs' homeworld. Yet despite all of the warchief's misgivings, he could not deny the death knights' potential. They used a different breed of magic than fel sorcery, one that was immensely powerful but would not drain the land of life. After weighing his options, Doomhammer accepted these unholy warriors into the Horde. The longer he waited, the more he risked losing the element of surprise in attacking the human nations. The death knights were the weapon he needed to crush Lordaeron, a means to strike fear into his enemies and counter humanity's magic. Orgrim ordered members of the Blackrock
clan to keep a close watch on the death knights. Secretly, the warchief planned to destroy Gul'dan and his undead soldiers once the Horde had secured victory. Orgrim was right to mistrust the death knights. Though they openly swore their allegiance to the Horde, they cared little for the warchief or his armies. The death knights were also not the subservient followers that Gul'dan had hoped they would be. They were loyal only to themselves, and they acted solely to preserve their own existence. After the creation of the death knights, all that remained was to replenish the Horde's dwindling supplies and armaments. For that, Orgrim turned his gaze to Khaz Modan, homeland of the Bronzebeard dwarves.
The Bronzebeard dwarves were a proud and resilient people. For over two thousand years, they had dwelled in Ironforge, a grand city carved into the heart of a mountain. The surrounding region, Khaz Modan, was filled with dwarven blacksmithing forges, and the mountains were rich with oil and metal ores. Before moving against Lordaeron, the orcs would conquer the dwarves' homeland and use its resources to bolster their arsenals. Amid a fierce blizzard, the Horde marched into Khaz Modan. The dwarves were ready. Demolition teams collapsed the mountain tunnels leading into the region, slowing the orcs' approach. Meanwhile, the dwarves called upon their old allies, the gnomes, for aid. The two races pooled their resources and set up defensive positions across Khaz Modan. Despite these preparations, the dwarves and the gnomes were no match for the orcish army. The Horde swept into Khaz Modan with the fury of a winter storm. Hundreds of dwarves and gnomes fell before the orcs' hungry blades. One by one, the Horde conquered the small settlements, outposts, and armories that dotted the icy landscape. Khaz Modan's defenders withered before the Horde's onslaught. The gnomes retreated to their capital, Gnomeregan, while the dwarves fled back to their fortress city, Ironforge. Seeing the dwarves as the greater of the two threats, Doomhammer committed his forces to toppling Ironforge. Yet it would not fall as the rest of Khaz Modan had. Nearly all of the city's residents took up arms. They knew this might be their last stand, and they were prepared to die with battleaxe in hand before surrendering. The Horde smashed against Ironforge like a battering ram, but to no avail. Every dwarf who died in battle brought ten orcs with them to the grave. The cost in lives grew so great that Doomhammer called off the siege. Ironforge was not his main goal, and he saw no need to throw his soldiers' lives away to conquer the stronghold. Doomhammer had what he needed. Khaz Modan and its bountiful resources were his to exploit.
THE DEFENSE OF GNOMEREGAN The orcs also made attempts to destroy Gnomeregan, but they never succeeded. The gnomes were a brilliant race, and they harnessed their advanced technologies to defend their lands. They rigged explosives throughout the forests and hills that surrounded Gnomeregan. Many orcs fell to these booby traps before they even reached the gnomish capital. Gnomeregan itself was shielded by an impenetrable iron gate. After weeks of bombarding the entrance with siege engines, Doomhammer called off the attack. As he'd done with the dwarves in Ironforge, he commanded the Bleeding Hollow to keep the gnomes contained in their city. But the warchief made no further attempts to conquer Gnomeregan. It would escape the Horde's wrath.
To keep the dwarves contained, Doomhammer stationed the Bleeding Hollow clan outside Ironforge's gates. He then ordered his Blackrock orcs to mine the surrounding mountains and commandeer the dwarves' forges. Before long, thick smoke blanketed Khaz Modan. Blacksmiths distributed newly wrought armaments and siege weapons throughout the Horde. The time to invade Lordaeron was drawing near.
After conquering the bulk of Khaz Modan, Doomhammer plotted the next phase of his campaign. To reach the human kingdoms by land, the orcs would need to pass through a swampy mire to the north called the Wetlands. It was a perilous route. Transporting siege engines and an army through that terrain would be a long, grueling slog. Then the orcs would be forced to cross the narrow Thandol Span bridge that led into the northern lands-a site the humans could easily defend. The humans would likely expect the Horde to cross north by land, but Doomhammer would not do the expected. He would build a fleet of ships and launch a surprise attack in the heart of humanity's territories. Though few orcs publicly questioned Doomhammer's decision, many had reservations about his plans. The orcs were not a seafaring people. Most of the superstitious clans feared the open sea. Much to Orgrim's surprise, Gul'dan and his Stormreaver clan proved to be instrumental in persuading the Horde to cross by sea. The warlock and his followers urged their allies that it was the best course of action, and that the voyage would be safe. Orgrim welcomed the assistance, but he remained wary of Gul'dan's motivations. In a bay tucked in the southwestern Wetlands, Orgrim oversaw the construction of a vast yet crude fleet. Orcs knew little of shipbuilding, but they had allies who did. Some of the Horde's ogres had maritime knowledge, and they helped construct immense vessels called juggernaughts. The Amani trolls also instructed the orcs in the ways of building small but swift ships that could safely navigate the seas and rivers. In addition, Doomhammer acquired aid from a completely new ally: the goblins. These ingenious and cunning creatures had witnessed the Horde's arrival and its conquest of Stormwind. More war was on the horizon, and they were determined to profit from it. Rather than avoid the orcs, the goblins of the Steamwheedle Cartel approached the invaders with an offer. The Horde was new to Azeroth, and it had much to learn about the world and its cultures. The goblins could provide new technologies, maps, and other useful
information to the orcs...for the right price. The warchief would not force the bold goblins into servitude; that was something Blackhand might have done. Orgrim saw more benefit in treating them as equals. If it was gold they wanted, gold they could have. The orcs had recovered a fortune from Stormwind's coffers, but they had no need of coin. Doomhammer paid the goblins handsomely for their aid. When he learned that they were also accomplished shipwrights, he hired them to oversee the construction of the Horde's fleet. With help from the goblins and the Horde's other members, orc builders set to work. Doomhammer did everything he could to camouflage the construction from human scouts.
Far north of the Wetlands, the Council of Seven Nations continued debating the merits of unity. During these meetings, gnome and dwarf refugees arrived with dire news: the orcs had conquered Khaz Modan. This turn of events shocked the human leaders. The dwarves and the gnomes were mighty, and the speed with which their territories had fallen defied understanding. What was worse, the Horde was now encroaching north. Even with this troubling development, King Greymane of Gilneas and King Perenolde of Alterac stubbornly resisted calls for creating the Alliance. They feared that by unifying, they would lose some of their regional power. Divisions widened between the gathered leaders. Their arguments grew so fierce that Gilneas and Alterac threatened to abandon the council. One person in attendance could not stand by as the humans squabbled over meaningless issues. His name was Turalyon, and he was one of Lordaeron's most venerated priests. Turalyon brought Stormwind's prince, Varian, to his side. The priest called on the leaders to forget their old differences. If they underestimated the orcs, every kingdom would suffer Stormwind's fate. Their cities would burn, and their children would become orphans much like Varian-if their children survived at all. The orcs were not a merciful people. Turalyon argued that the kingdoms stood at a crossroads. If they failed to unite, history would know humanity as a people who were too proud to band together. A people who'd had a chance to save Azeroth but instead had thrown it all away over politics and illusions of power. Yet if humans did unite into the Alliance, they could change history. They could arise as Azeroth's guardians. After all, no other race in the known world had humanity's resources, its strength of leadership, or its bravery. The Council of Seven Nations erupted in applause after Turalyon's speech. His words even swayed Greymane and Perenolde. That very day, the human leaders voted unanimously to form the Alliance of Lordaeron. Debates followed about who could best lead the Alliance military, and the rulers decided on Anduin Lothar. Because he was from Stormwind, he had no
political ties to the northern human nations. He could command the armies fairly and act as a neutral party in disputes. Lothar accepted this title with great humility. As supreme commander of the Alliance army, he wielded more power and influence than any human had since the days of the ancient king Thoradin. Lothar immediately rallied the Alliance's forces and ordered them to gather in Hillsbrad Foothills, a region north of the Wetlands.
As the human forces amassed, Lothar made other preparations. The Alliance was composed of disparate nations, some of which were rivals. They all had different customs and ways of life. Lothar needed something to bind them as one. He needed champions whom every human could rally behind, no matter where they came from. The clerics were the most obvious choice to fill this role, but they hadn't fared well in the First War. Though they were brave, they lacked martial training. Clerics were better suited to using the Holy Light to mend wounds off the battlefield. Lothar needed something else.
TURALYON RALLIES THE COUNCIL OF SEVEN NATIONS TO FORM THE ALLIANCE The solution came from the Church of the Holy Light. Archbishop Alonsus Faol had recently learned of everything that had transpired in Stormwind, including how the clerics had fared. He met with Lothar and proposed forging a new order, one that would represent the best qualities of humanity. It would comprise soldiers who were skilled not only in wielding the Light, but also in leadership and the arts of traditional warfare. With Lothar's permission, Faol recruited a handful of knights to form this new order. These individuals all showed an aptitude for the Holy Light, and they also exemplified the qualities of loyalty, bravery, and honor. Faol called his students the paladins, and their group was named the Order of the Silver Hand.
The order's members were revered individuals from Lordaeron. There was Turalyon, the priest who had helped forge the Alliance at the Council of Seven Nations. There was Saidan Dathrohan, a mountain of a man who was gifted with immense physical strength. Then there was Tirion Fordring, a knight renowned for his zeal and resilience. Lastly, there was Uther. He had already apprenticed under Faol for some years, and he was an accomplished knight and a pious believer in the Holy Light. Lothar also sent one of his comrades from Stormwind to undergo paladin training: Gavinrad the Dire, a battle-hardened knight who had fought in the First War. Faol welcomed this student with open arms. The city of Stratholme would later serve as the paladins' base of operations. Yet for the time being, Lothar kept them close, ordering them to travel alongside the main Alliance army. Day and night, the holy warriors were trained vigorously. Faol taught them how to use the Light to comfort their allies and smite their enemies, and also how to lead by example. They would be more than just weapons. No matter how dire times became, the paladins would serve as lights in the darkness, as beacons of hope to guide the Alliance. Faol instructed his paladins to live simple lives. They would seek no fortune or glory in war. Until the end of their days, they would put the needs of others above their own. As training progressed, Faol presented a set of enchanted librams to the paladins. These holy tomes were some of the church's most ancient relics. Each libram represented what Faol saw as a core trait of the Silver Hand: retribution, holiness, protection, justice, and compassion. Faol gave one libram to each of the paladins. He challenged his students to become living embodiments of what their holy tomes represented. Turalyon would hold the Libram of Protection; Uther would hold the Libram of Justice; Tirion would hold the Libram of Retribution; Saidan would hold the Libram of Holiness; Gavinrad would hold the Libram of Compassion. Lothar often checked in on the emergent Order of the Silver Hand. He was so pleased by what he saw that he asked for Turalyon and Uther to serve as his lieutenants. Faol was happy to accommodate the supreme commander, but he did not release the paladins from his care yet. It would be weeks before they were ready to set foot on the battlefield.

South of Lordaeron, Alexstrasza the Life-Binder and her red dragons continued searching for who had stolen the Demon Soul. Their investigations eventually led them to the orcs. Alexstrasza and her kin arrived just in time to witness the Horde's brutal assault on Khaz Modan. Though the Life-Binder longed to aid the dwarves and the gnomes, finding the Demon Soul was paramount. The artifact contained the powers of every Dragon Aspect except for Deathwing. If it fell into the wrong hands, it could spell the doom of not only dragonkind but the whole world. Alexstrasza soon discovered that the Demon Soul was in the care of an orc known as Nekros. He and his Dragonmaw clan were experimenting with the artifact and abusing its power. Alexstrasza and her followers descended on Nekros, expecting little resistance. Such a primitive creature could never unlock the Demon Soul's secrets. The dragons were wrong. Unbeknownst to Alexstrasza and her allies, Nekros had learned much about the artifact from dreams and visions sent by Deathwing. The black Dragon Aspect had taught the orc of the Demon Soul's true power, and he had instructed him in how to wield it. The greatest knowledge Deathwing had shared with Nekros was that the relic could be used to enslave Alexstrasza and other Dragon Aspects. Nekros called on the Demon Soul's fury, and the artifact seared the LifeBinder with excruciating pain. Alexstrasza plummeted from the sky and slammed into the mountains outside Khaz Modan. Nekros then bent the Demon Soul's power to enslave the Life-Binder, and the rest of the Dragonmaw orcs swarmed over the enormous creature and bound her in chains. Though the Demon Soul could also be wielded against other dragons, Nekros was but one orc, and his knowledge of the artifact was limited. He knew he would never be able to use the relic's power on Alexstrasza and her
followers at once, and so he focused his attention on the Life-Binder. The red dragons could do little to help their queen. Every time one of them swooped down toward the orcs, Nekros lashed Alexstrasza with the Demon Soul's extraordinary power. He did not speak the language of dragons, but his message was clear: when the dragons attacked the orcs, Alexstrasza suffered great pain. By enslaving Alexstrasza, Nekros effectively bound the red dragons to his will. The creatures feared that if they did not obey the Dragonmaw, Alexstrasza would be tortured or even killed.
Word of the Dragonmaw's feats spread throughout the Horde. No one was more pleased by the news than Warchief Doomhammer. He now had another potent weapon in his arsenal. Yet it would take time to reliably control the dragons and use them in the heat of battle. Doomhammer commanded Nekros and the Dragonmaw to take control of Grim Batol, a remote fortress in the mountains east of the Wetlands. This dilapidated stronghold had once belonged to the Wildhammer dwarves, but the clan had abandoned it long ago. Nekros and his followers chained Alexstrasza in Grim Batol's depths. They also forced the other red dragons who had been with the Aspect to accompany them, threatening to hurt the Life-Binder if they disobeyed. On Draenor, the Dragonmaw had mastered the art of training winged rylaks as battle mounts. They would do the same with their fearsome captives in Grim Batol.
THE CURSED STRONGHOLD Grim Batol was a haunted place. Centuries ago, a war between the Dark Iron and the Wildhammer dwarf clans had raged deep within the city. The Dark Iron sorceress Modgud called upon dark powers to overwhelm Grim Batol's defenders. Though the Wildhammers eventually killed her and drove out the Dark Irons, their home was never the same. Modgud had cursed the city upon her death, leaving it corrupted forever. The Wildhammers established a new
home in a majestic region called the Hinterlands.
While the orcs set to work crafting harnesses and saddles, Nekros kept watch over Alexstrasza. The Life-Binder vowed to destroy the orc for what he was doing, but her threats were hollow. As long as Nekros had the Demon Soul, he was untouchable. During her imprisonment, Alexstrasza began laying new clutches of eggs. Nekros was quick to see this development as a golden opportunity. If his clan could successfully hatch the eggs, the orcs could raise the dragon whelps as the Horde's loyal servants. From afar, Deathwing rejoiced in Alexstrasza's enslavement. He continued subtly advising Nekros on how best to use the Demon Soul to control the red dragons. Giving the Horde such powerful weapons served Deathwing's plans to restore his black dragonflight, but there was an added benefit. He knew that it would break the Life-Binder's heart to see her kin used as tools of war. And he would relish every moment of Alexstrasza's torment.
As the Horde was bolstering its forces, so, too, was the Alliance. Lothar had the full might of the human nations at his command, but he would take no chances against the Horde. He sought help wherever he could, including from the ancient and powerful high elves of Quel'Thalas. Long ago, humans and elves had fought a bloody war against the Amani trolls. Only by uniting had Quel'Thalas and Lothar's ancestors triumphed over their enemies. Following the victory, the high elves swore an oath to the human king Thoradin: if he or any of his bloodline ever required aid in the future, Quel'Thalas would give it without question. Lothar carried Thoradin's blood, and he beseeched the high elves to make good on their ancient pact. Lothar's call to war was met with mixed feelings in Quel'Thalas. The high elf king, Anasterian Sunstrider, had heard rumors about strange creatures in the south, but he did not consider them a threat. He sent only a small elven fleet to the Alliance, commanding the rest of his forces to stay in Quel'Thalas. Not everyone did. The highly skilled ranger-captain Alleria Windrunner disobeyed her king's orders and brought a handful of her fellow elves south. She believed the Horde was a much greater danger than most of her kin did, and she was determined to see what the orcs could do with her own eyes. Though Lothar was disappointed with the small number of elves who joined the Alliance, he didn't show it publicly. He welcomed them with open arms. The rangers in particular would serve a much-needed role as archers, scouts, and mobile support troops. The elves arrived in Hillsbrad Foothills by sea just as dire news reached Lothar. Like most members of the Alliance, he had expected the Horde to invade the north by crossing the Thandol Span, an effort that would have taken many more months. Yet human scouts reported that the orcs had constructed a fleet, and they were poised to set sail. The invasion would happen much sooner than Lothar had anticipated. Lothar urged the rest of the Alliance's armies to gather in Hillsbrad Foothills, the most likely place the Horde would make landfall. To waylay
the orcish fleet for the time being, the supreme commander called upon Admiral Daelin Proudmoore and the Alliance navy.
Warchief Doomhammer had not expected to keep his fleet a secret forever. When he learned that human scouting ships had spied his vessels, he made no change to his plans. Construction on the Horde fleet had finished, and he commanded his troops to board. Orgrim believed the Horde would reach southern Lordaeron before the humans could muster a proper defense. The advantage would be small, but Orgrim had learned from a lifetime of warfare that small advantages often meant the difference between victory and defeat. Hundreds of orcish ships, laden with supplies and thousands of soldiers, sliced through the roiling sea. Their journey was not uncontested. Near the island of Zul'Dare, Admiral Daelin Proudmoore and the Alliance navy intercepted the Horde fleet. When Proudmoore found the crude Horde ships, it was akin to a wolf crossing paths with an injured lamb. The admiral hailed from the island nation of Kul Tiras, and he'd spent his entire life on the high seas. His experience in maritime warfare had no equal in the world. Proudmoore's sleek vessels outmaneuvered the Horde fleet even quicker than he'd anticipated. The first Alliance cannon volley blew orcish ships to pieces. Dozens of transports sank, and the churning waves swallowed their crews. Proudmoore soon realized that he could destroy the entire Horde army at sea. He could end the war against the Alliance before it even started. Perhaps he would have, if not for the arrival of dragons. Doomhammer had known that the humans were better equipped for battle at sea. That was why he'd ordered Nekros and the Dragonmaw clan to supply aerial support in the form of red dragons. At first, Nekros had protested. His orcs had not yet trained the dragons to be suitable battle mounts. Yet after Doomhammer pressured him, Nekros relented. He dispatched three red dragons to guard the Horde fleet, threatening to torture Alexstrasza if they disobeyed.
Reluctantly, the dragons had followed the orcish ships from a distance. When Proudmoore's navy attacked, they finally revealed themselves. The enormous creatures dove from the sky and bathed the Alliance fleet in fire. Proudmoore had no means to fend off the dragons, though small in number they were. The admiral called for a full retreat, and his ships scattered.
With Admiral Proudmoore's fleet scattered, the Horde continued to Hillsbrad Foothills and made landfall uncontested. The Alliance's defenses were sparse. Though the majority of the Alliance forces had reached Hillsbrad, they were in disarray. The orcish army stormed ashore, but the red dragons who guarded the Horde's fleet refused to follow them. Nekros had stayed in Grim Batol to watch over Alexstrasza, and he was not present to give the creatures new commands. He had ordered them only to protect the ships, and they would not kill any more humans than necessary. It was a small act of defiance, but it was all that the dragons could do without endangering Alexstrasza. Orgrim did not press the issue. He left the dragons where they were and marched inland. He planned to cross the Alterac Mountains to reach Capital City. It would be a difficult journey, but it was the quickest way to strike at Lordaeron. Lothar anticipated this plan. From a military standpoint, Lordaeron's capital was a target that was too good to resist. Its fall would breed division and throw the rest of the Alliance into chaos. Lothar would not let that happen. He arrayed his tired troops across Hillsbrad to bar the northern and western routes to the capital. Lothar then rallied his soldiers as best he could, but his words had little effect. He could see the fear in their eyes. This was the first time most of the humans had ever seen the hulking orcs. They were things born of nightmare. Fortunately for Lothar, the paladins had finished their training. The holy knights rode through the Alliance lines, their presence filling their fellow soldiers with hope and courage. The Horde's war drums sounded, and the howling mass of green-skinned warriors charged north. They smashed into the human lines with war cries on
their lips and oiled blades in hand. For the first time in history, the full might of the Horde and the Alliance armies clashed. Alleria and her high elf rangers thinned the Horde's ranks with bow and arrow, while Lothar fought beside his paladins. Elsewhere, Khadgar and other magi unleashed their arcane powers on the approaching orcs. The Second War had begun. Amid the fighting, a corrosive fog crept over the battlefield. From the fetid mists, slain human soldiers rose from the dead and then launched themselves at their former comrades. At the head of this unholy army were a handful of hooded figures riding skeletal steeds. The death knights had entered the field. They charged through the stunned human army, inflicting pain and terror on their enemies. Orgrim watched the attack with a mix of displeasure and satisfaction. He was still uneasy about the death knights, but he now saw just how effective they were in combat. The mere sight of the death knights horrified the humans, and the Alliance lines began to crumble. It was then that a blazing white light appeared from Uther, Turalyon, and the other paladins. Waves of holy energy rippled over the Alliance soldiers, striking down the reanimated human corpses and sweeping away the death knights' corruptive fog.
ALLIANCE PALADINS AND OTHER SOLDIERS BATTLE THE DEATH KNIGHTS The paladins called upon their holy powers to mend wounded soldiers and ease their fearful hearts. Filled with renewed confidence, the Alliance regrouped and slammed down on the orcish front lines like a hammer. Sporadic battles broke out in Hillsbrad. The Horde and the Alliance were evenly matched, but Doomhammer knew that would not last forever. The longer the orcs stayed in Hillsbrad, the more time the Alliance had to call in reinforcements from their far-flung territories. The human army was protecting the quickest routes to Lordaeron's capital. Doomhammer's only course of action was to go east and find another way to the city. For this, he called on the Amani trolls. They knew the mountainous terrain well. The trolls agreed to guide the orcs, but they would not do so
until Doomhammer made good on his promise to help them liberate their leader, Zul'jin.
Doomhammer had not forgotten his vow to free Warlord Zul'jin. Orc scouts had discovered the troll's whereabouts in a prison camp near the human bastion known as Durnholde Keep. As battles continued across Hillsbrad, Doomhammer himself led a raiding party to rescue Zul'jin. The prison's defenders stood little chance against the warchief and his battle-hardened soldiers. After freeing Zul'jin, Doomhammer invited him and the rest of his people to join the Horde. At first, Zul'jin balked at the proposal. He was warlord of the great Amani. He would answer to no one but himself. Doomhammer was quick to allay Zul'jin's fears about leadership. If the Amani pledged themselves to the Horde, they would not become servants. Zul'jin would retain full control over his people. He and Doomhammer would stand as equals against their enemies. Doomhammer finally won Zul'jin's support with an offer: if the Amani committed their forces to the Horde, the orcs would help them annihilate their rivals, the high elves of Quel'Thalas. Attacking Quel'Thalas meant moving farther north from Lordaeron's capital than Doomhammer wanted. It was a risk, but a necessary one. The battles at Hillsbrad had taught Doomhammer many things about the Alliance. For one, the paladins were a formidable force, equal to that of the death knights. To win, Doomhammer would need the Amani's support. Doomhammer ordered the Horde to turn east. His trusted lieutenant Varok Saurfang commanded a rearguard of Blackrock orcs to waylay the Alliance. This gave the rest of the Horde precious time to cross Hillsbrad and funnel through a narrow mountain pass and into a region known as the Hinterlands. Though the land was rugged, the Horde moved quickly with help from the Amani guides. The trolls led the orcs on a path that would take them over the northern mountains and into Quel'Thalas. En route, Zul'jin rallied the local Amani trolls to his side. All seemed clear until winged shadows appeared over the Horde. These
were not dragons; they were gryphons, ridden by the region's fearless Wildhammer dwarves. From on high, they rained lightning and thunder down upon the Horde.
The Hinterlands had long been home to the Wildhammer dwarves. From their mountain stronghold called Aerie Peak, they kept watch over the land. The Wildhammers were a tenacious people famous for their kinship with gryphons. Many of these dwarves were adept shaman, and they infused the power of lightning into weapons known as stormhammers. The Wildhammers were also a fiercely independent people. Due to their penchant for isolationism, they knew nothing about the Horde or the battles raging in Hillsbrad. Only when the orcs marched into the Hinterlands did the dwarves learn of their existence. The Wildhammer leader, Thane Kurdran, took action to protect his homeland. He and his bravest gryphon riders barreled down from the skies. They bombarded the Horde with their stormhammers and then ascended back into the safety of the clouds. Kurdran continually launched these devastating strikes and whittled away at the Horde's strength. The only battle-ready dragons currently at the Horde's disposal were guarding its ships in Hillsbrad, and so the orcs had no means of countering the troublesome gryphon riders. Doomhammer could not continue north with the dwarves harassing his lines. The warchief led his soldiers in an assault on Aerie Peak, forcing Kurdran and his gryphon riders to converge on the capital. As battle erupted outside the city, Orgrim and half of the Horde pulled back. They would continue north while the remainder of their army kept the dwarves occupied. Kurdran and his forces paid little attention to the retreating orcs and trolls. They were concerned only with defending Aerie Peak, not with chasing down the rest of the Horde. After Doomhammer slipped north, Lothar and his army arrived in the Hinterlands and came to the Wildhammer clan's aid. The combined might of humans, elves, and dwarves soon pushed the orcs away from Aerie Peak and sent them retreating into the forests. The assault on Aerie Peak changed Kurdran and his people. They now knew of the threat posed by the Horde, and they were determined to help
defeat the orcs. Kurdran pledged his clan to the Alliance. The inclusion of the Wildhammers and their gryphon riders was a much-needed boon. Though the orcs had not used dragons since the naval battle near Zul'Dare, Lothar feared a day would come when they would return. If the Alliance was to match the Horde's aerial superiority, it would be through the gryphon riders. From Kurdran, the Alliance learned that half of the Horde had slipped north. It was only then that Lothar realized he'd been outmaneuvered by Orgrim. The Horde contingent in the Hinterlands was but a portion of the orcs' full strength. It was a bitter revelation, but Lothar did not wallow in defeat. He immediately dispatched Turalyon and a large part of his armies to track Orgrim down. Meanwhile, the rest of the Alliance remained in the Hinterlands to deal with the Horde there. The other potential routes to Lordaeron's capital seemed secure. The kingdom of Alterac was holding the line to the east. King Perenolde had set his garrisons to barricade those mountain passes, so if the Horde tried to march on the city through that route, the defenses would slow its approach.
Throughout the Second War, Garona had lived under the watchful eye of the Blackrock warrior Eitrigg. She had served many functions, sometimes translating missives taken from captured Alliance messengers. She'd also fought alongside her fellow Horde soldiers. Initially Garona viewed Eitrigg as just another mindless warrior, a fanatic who had sworn his life to Warchief Blackhand despite his tyrannical disposition. But over time, she had seen a glimmer of something in the orc, a fading ember of pride and honor. Garona believed she could win Eitrigg's trust, and she told him everything she knew of Gul'dan and the Shadow Council. She also revealed her knowledge of demons and the true purpose of the Horde. The orcs were merely puppets of a terrible enemy. If the Horde destroyed the Alliance, the demons would transform Azeroth into a wasteland. Eitrigg treated Garona's words as poisonous lies. After all, she had been Gul'dan's assassin. How could he ever trust someone who had committed such dishonorable acts? After Eitrigg's rebuke, Garona abandoned any hope of helping him see the truth. She bided her time, patiently awaiting an opportunity to escape her handler. That opportunity finally came in the Hinterlands. As chaos engulfed the region, Garona slipped into the forests and vanished. Eitrigg considered hunting down the half-orc, but waging war on the Alliance was far more important than recovering a single prisoner. Eitrigg had other reasons for letting Garona go. Some part of him sympathized with the half-orc and her tortured past. She had not been born an assassin. Gul'dan had made her that way. As long as she did not turn her blades against the Horde, he would let her go. Perhaps on Azeroth she would find something she'd never had on Draenor. Perhaps she would find a true home.
With much of the Alliance bogged down in the Hinterlands, Orgrim led his half of the Horde toward Quel'Thalas unopposed. En route, Zul'jin visited the Amani capital, Zul'Aman, to gather allies. He whipped his people into a frenzy with the promise of spilling elf blood. Thousands of trolls, adorned in enchanted talismans and ritual tattoos, streamed out of Zul'Aman and took their place alongside Orgrim's Horde. An army the likes of which the high elves had not faced in thousands of years soon loomed on Quel'Thalas's borders. The marauding Horde decimated the kingdom's outer holdings in short order. As Orgrim advanced north, he found that many death knights and Amani witch doctors were unable to wield their magics. Gul'dan eventually discovered what was dampening their powers. Thousands of years ago, after the War of the Ancients, Quel'Thalas had erected a powerful magical barrier around its kingdom. This was Ban'dinoriel, "the Gatekeeper." The shield was tied to a series of monolithic Runestones, relics that prevented the Burning Legion and other outsiders from detecting the arcane magics wielded by the high elves. They also weakened the powers of their enemies, such as the Amani trolls. Gul'dan claimed that dismantling one of the Runestones would disrupt the barrier and restore the Horde's use of magic. Then he and his followers would use the relic to strengthen the Horde for the siege of Quel'Thalas. After much consideration, Doomhammer agreed to the plans. He didn't trust Gul'dan. But thus far, the warlock had proved himself useful and loyal to the Horde. Orgrim's spies in the Stormreaver clan reported no mischievous activities. What Doomhammer didn't know was that Gul'dan had won these spies to his side with threats, promises of power, and other means. Doomhammer still suspected a day would come when Gul'dan would try to betray him and take control of the Horde. He never could have imagined the truth: the warlock was planning to abandon the Horde. In recent months, Gul'dan had nearly amassed the power to do so. Though the death knights had not proved to be as loyal to him as he had once hoped,
he had the backing of two mighty clans: the Stormreavers and the Twilight's Hammer. Yet that was not enough. Not nearly. The warlock needed as much power as he could get to fend off Doomhammer and any other foes he would meet on his journey to the Tomb of Sargeras. Quel'Thalas's mysterious relics would give Gul'dan the strength he needed. He and his followers quickly dismantled one of Quel'Thalas's Runestones. They chiseled away at the monolithic relic to build structures known as the Altars of Storms. Gul'dan then turned to an ancient ritual used by the Highmaul ogres. In the distant past, they'd found a way to empower members of their own race. By channeling raw arcane magic into regular ogres, the Highmaul could transform them into highly intelligent two-headed ogre magi. Few living ogres knew of this technique, but Cho'gall was one of them. He handpicked the brutish ogres who would undergo the transformation, and he oversaw the rituals himself. Before long, two-headed ogre magi emerged from the altars. They were just as powerful as Gul'dan had hoped they'd be. More importantly, they secretly swore their loyalty to him. Now, all that remained for Gul'dan was finding the right time to make his move.
INSTRUMENTS OF POWER During the Second War, Gul'dan gathered information concerning some of the powerful artifacts he had learned about from prying into Medivh's mind. He never had the opportunity to seek out these relics, but he did reveal their existence to the death knights.

With the Runestone desecrated, the Horde's death knights and other spellcasters regained their powers. Orgrim's forces stormed toward Quel'Thalas's capital, Silvermoon City. They terrorized the countryside, pillaging settlements and cutting down every elf they found. King Anasterian called on his greatest generals to stop the Horde's advance. Elf magi and rangers spread across Quel'Thalas to resist Orgrim's forces, but they did not have to fight alone for long. Turalyon and Alleria soon arrived with half of the Alliance army. While Turalyon organized his soldiers and launched attacks against the Horde, Alleria met with Anasterian in Silvermoon City. She urged the elf king to pledge his forces to the Alliance, but he needed little convincing. Anasterian was furious about the Horde's assault. Not since the ancient Troll Wars had the elves died in such numbers. Not since that terrible time had their lands been so defiled. Humans and elves had once banded together to save their respective kingdoms from oblivion. Now, they would do so again. The Alliance would have the full support and backing of Quel'Thalas. Though the Alliance and the elves were now unified in purpose, any hope that they had of a quick victory vanished in smoke and fire. The red dragons had come. After months of hard work, the Dragonmaw orcs had learned how to ride their winged captives in battle. Dozens of the monstrous creatures appeared over Quel'Thalas. The gryphon riders, unaccustomed to battling dragons, were forced to retreat. The orcs and their mounts then swooped down on the Alliance armies, bathing them in gouts of flame. A firestorm enveloped the forests around Quel'Thalas, and smoke blotted out the sun. The enslaved dragons took no joy in the destruction. Far from it. Many of them wept in sorrow as they slaughtered the elves and burned the life from the wilds. The roaring firestorm caused most of the elf defenders to seek shelter in
Silvermoon City. King Anasterian's people had no physical weapons that could stop the Horde and its dragons from invading the elven capital, but they had something else that could. Elf sorcerers summoned an immense shield around Silvermoon City. This barrier derived its power from the Sunwell, a fount of magic that served as the heart of Quel'Thalas's culture. For thousands of years, the elves had used its energies to construct their kingdom and protect it from outsiders. The Horde smashed against the shield again and again, but the barrier did not give way. Even the red dragons' mystical fire could not breach it. Orgrim's patience was wearing thin. Destroying the high elven stronghold had never been his priority. Lordaeron's capital was. Though Orgrim had not yet satisfied the Amani pact, he had accomplished other things in Quel'Thalas. The gifted ogre magi now served the Horde. The Dragonmaw clan had finally brought the bulk of their winged servants to bear in battle. The Horde had also dealt a grave blow to Quel'Thalas, one that would take the elves many years to recover from. Orgrim began planning the next stage of his campaign. He would need a route to reach Lordaeron's capital from Quel'Thalas, one that would catch the Alliance by surprise.
After failing to breach Silvermoon City, Orgrim pulled his forces back and ordered them to march west. The time had come to resume his campaign and attack Lordaeron's capital, and the warchief had found a way to the stronghold. The roads and valleys between Quel'Thalas and Lordaeron were the easy routes to take if one sought to reach the capital, but they were also heavily fortified. Orgrim would not take them. He would move his armies through the rugged Alterac Mountains south of Lordaeron's capital, giving him the element of surprise. Not all of Doomhammer's allies agreed with his plans. Zul'jin and the Amani rejected the warchief's call to go west. Their hatred of the elves burned so hot that they would not abandon the siege of Silvermoon. Zul'jin vowed that he would attack Lordaeron's capital only after all of Quel'Thalas was in flames and he held King Anasterian's severed head in his hands. Zul'jin's stubbornness was both infuriating and troubling. Doomhammer had relied heavily on the Amani to guide the orcs through a land that was not their own. Losing the trolls now, at this critical moment, could spell doom for the Horde. Gul'dan sensed Orgrim's mounting fears. The warlock knew that now was his chance to finally break free from the warchief's control. Gul'dan convinced Orgrim and Zul'jin that the Stormreaver clan had found a new way to destroy the barrier around Silvermoon City. All it would take was a few more days. Once the Stormreavers had succeeded, the elven city would fall; the trolls could sate their appetite for vengeance, and then they could rejoin the Horde. Doomhammer was loath to leave more of his forces behind in Quel'Thalas, but Gul'dan's words swayed him. The Alliance was scattered: half of its forces were in Silvermoon, and the other half were still battling the Horde in the Hinterlands. Lordaeron's capital was ripe for the taking, and Doomhammer could not allow the opportunity to slip through his fingers.
Doomhammer left Gul'dan and his Stormreaver clan to unravel the barrier, but he ordered the Dragonmaw to stay in Quel'Thalas and keep watch over the warlock. If the barrier had not come down in three days' time, they would force Gul'dan and his followers to march west. And if Gul'dan was foolish enough to disobey, Doomhammer gave the Dragonmaw permission to feed him to their war mounts. Doomhammer led his forces west, his mind plagued by doubts. Since the landing in Hillsbrad Foothills, things had not gone according to plan. But he knew that was the way of war. Those who adapted found victory, and those who refused to change were destined for defeat. When the Horde entered the mountains, fortune smiled on Doomhammer. Alterac's king, Perenolde, was awaiting the orcish army. He carried an offer of allegiance... From the beginning of the Second War, Perenolde had been wary of fighting the Horde. He'd believed that the orcs were an unstoppable force. His fear of the Horde had only deepened as he'd learned of the death knights, red dragons, and ogre magi in its ranks. The Horde's arrival in the Alterac Mountains had finally pushed Perenolde to betrayal. Rather than fight his enemies, he would strike a deal with them. He would survive. Perenolde met the Horde to deliver a simple message: he would grant the orcish army safe passage through the mountains if Alterac would be spared from the Horde's wrath.
TERRITORIES OF THE HORDE AND THE ALLIANCE DURING THE SECOND WAR Orgrim eagerly accepted the offer, and Perenolde showed the warchief how to avoid the defensive positions in the mountains. Night and day, the Horde marched through Alterac's unguarded passes. When they finally reached Tirisfal Glades, Orgrim gave his forces no rest. He threw every soldier at his command against Capital City's walls.
Turalyon and his allies had long suspected that the Horde would eventually pivot west and strike at Lordaeron's capital. Their fears were confirmed when Orgrim and most of his forces suddenly pulled back from Quel'Thalas. Though some elements of the Horde army were still rampaging through Quel'Thalas, Turalyon ordered the bulk of his soldiers to move west with all due haste. With half of the Alliance army battling in the Hinterlands, the task of defending Lordaeron's capital fell to him. At first, reaching the city before Orgrim did not seem so impossible. The Horde had ventured into the Alterac Mountains, and the region's defenses would slow the warchief. Then word of King Perenolde's betrayal reached the scattered Alliance forces. No one could believe it was true. No one could fathom that any human would pledge loyalty to the bloodthirsty Horde. But it was true, and the implications were disastrous. With the Alterac Mountains fully barricaded, Doomhammer's journey west should have taken months. With a safe passage open to them, the Horde's soldiers had already reached Lordaeron's capital. Turalyon feared that the city would fall before he could save it, but Lordaeron was not as helpless as he believed. King Terenas commanded the capital. Though he was not a warrior, he was a man of great charisma and cunning. As Horde catapults bombarded the capital, Terenas told his people that this battle would decide the war. The future of humanity-the future of the Alliance-rested on their shoulders. Terenas himself vowed to die if it meant keeping the Horde at bay until reinforcements could arrive. Against the wishes of his advisors, he took his place on the ramparts and organized the city's defenses. Orgrim admired Lordaeron's tenacity. The humans and their king fought with a fearlessness akin to that of the orcs. Yet it wouldn't last. Every day, Orgrim whittled away at the capital's defenses. Every day, his siege engines pounded the stronghold's crumbling walls. Once the Horde's reinforcements arrived from Quel'Thalas, the city would fall. The question was when those troops would arrive. The Dragonmaw,
Stormreaver, and Twilight's Hammer clans were behind schedule, and Doomhammer had received not a word from them. Something was not right. Doomhammer felt it in his bones. His unease deepened when Turalyon and his army approached from the east. Their arrival distracted the orcish forces, giving the capital's defenders muchneeded rest. Doomhammer did not fear Turalyon and his forces-he feared what their appearance meant. The other Alliance armies were en route to the capital. The Horde had to breach the stronghold soon. Orgrim had the death knights at his disposal, but he also needed the rest of his soldiers from Quel'Thalas to secure victory. He would never get them. The Dragonmaw arrived outside Lordaeron's capital, bearing dire news. Gul'dan had betrayed the Horde. He had taken the Stormreaver and Twilight's Hammer clans with him toward the orcish fleet anchored off of Hillsbrad Foothills. On the heels of this discovery, more troubling news reached Orgrim. The Alliance had learned of King Perenolde's treachery and barricaded the open passes in the Alterac Mountains. Calling on reinforcements from the Hinterlands was now out of the question. In that moment, Doomhammer knew that the war was lost. Even if his forces were able to take the capital, they could not hold it against the full strength of the Alliance. Fury burned through Doomhammer's veins. The Horde had been so close, so very close, to total victory. Now, it faced total annihilation. Orgrim called off the siege and ordered his forces into a full retreat to Khaz Modan. He dispatched a Dragonmaw messenger to deliver the same command to the soldiers in the Hinterlands. If the Horde could regroup, there was still a chance to put the pieces of its campaign together. It was a slim hope, but it was the only one Doomhammer had. The warchief sent the Horde's dragon riders to cover their retreat and waylay the Alliance forces as much as possible. He also sent the Black Tooth Grin clan to hunt down Gul'dan. Orgrim had spared the warlock once before. He would not make that mistake again.
A few days after Doomhammer marched to Lordaeron's capital, Gul'dan gathered his allies and revealed his plans to seek out the Tomb of Sargeras. He promised power to all who followed him, more power than they could ever hope to gain by continuing with the Horde's pointless war. Nearly every member of the Twilight's Hammer and the Stormreaver clans pledged their support to the warlock. Yet there were a few noticeable holdouts among the Horde in Quel'Thalas. The Amani trolls had no interest in Gul'dan's call. They continued their siege on the elven capital. The Dragonmaw also defied the warlock, and they moved to bar his path. In the end, neither side risked fighting. The threat of mutual annihilation was too great. The Dragonmaw set out west to rejoin the main Horde force and warn Orgrim of what had transpired. Meanwhile, Gul'dan and his followers headed south. They met occasional resistance from humans along the way, but nothing that truly gave them pause. In Hillsbrad Foothills, the renegades commandeered a portion of the Horde fleet and sailed west. Unbeknownst to Gul'dan, the Black Tooth Grin orcs had nearly caught up to him. They boarded the rest of the orcish vessels and followed in his wake. The Black Tooth Grin were not the only threat to Gul'dan. Far from it. Kil'jaeden soon learned of Gul'dan's reckless betrayal, which had come as a surprise. The warlock had hidden his intentions well from the demon lord. Kil'jaeden prepared to annihilate his former servant for single-handedly dooming what should have been a momentous Legion victory. Sargeras himself ordered the demon lord to stand down. It was not out of mercy. No, Sargeras wanted to punish the warlock in his own way. If it was power Gul'dan wanted, then the Legion's ruler would let him find the Tomb of Sargeras. He would let him come within reach of what he desired, let the foolish orc taste what could have been his. Then Sargeras would rip it all away, just as Gul'dan had done to the Horde's hopes of victory.
Based on the information he had gleaned from Guardian Medivh's mind, Gul'dan plotted a course to the Tomb of Sargeras. The voyage was long and harsh. Colossal waves and fearsome storms lashed Gul'dan's fleet. It was as if nature itself were rising up to thwart the warlock's quest. As Gul'dan neared the tomb, he could sense the godly energies emanating from within. The promise of so much power, so close at hand, consumed his every thought. The Tomb of Sargeras rested at the bottom of the sea, and it would require the combined efforts of Gul'dan and his allies to lift it to the surface. The warlock led a ritual, weaving his followers' magics into a single immense spell. The skies turned black as pitch, and the winds lashed the sea into a frenzy. Slowly, ever slowly, the tomb rose from the depths. A rocky island breached from the churning ocean. At its center was the colossal Tomb of Sargeras, an imposing tower that dominated the barnaclecovered ground. Not long after the Tomb of Sargeras surfaced, the Black Tooth Grin approached the island. Gul'dan knew he did not have the numbers to defeat his pursuers, but if he could harness the tomb's power, he could survive. He did not know what, if any, dangers lurked within the tomb, but he had little time to prepare for them. Gul'dan ordered Cho'gall and the Twilight's Hammer to hold off their enemies while he took the Stormreaver clan into the structure. As the warlock and his adherents hurried through the tomb's shadowy corridors, they eventually discovered that they were not alone... Long ago, when Aegwynn had transported Sargeras's avatar into the tomb, she had also imprisoned a number of his demon followers at the site. Most of these creatures were dead or barely clinging to life. The Guardian had believed that the tomb's enchanted seals would keep them contained. That much was true-the demons would never have been able to escape the structure on their own. Yet over the millennia, some of them had fed on the avatar's lingering power, regaining enough strength to prowl the tomb. At Sargeras's command, the creatures leapt from the shadows to tear
Gul'dan's followers apart. Then they turned their wrath on the warlock and flayed him alive, ripping the flesh and muscle from his bones. For a brief moment, his screams of agony shook the tomb. Then there was only silence. Only a few of Gul'dan's Stormreaver adherents survived the encounter with the demons. Before fleeing from the tomb, they recovered their master's head, believing that it held great power. Outside, the Twilight's Hammer fought for their own survival. Led by Dal'rend and Maim Blackhand, the Black Tooth Grin cut down the betrayers and left their bodies to rot in the tomb's shadow. Cho'gall suffered grave wounds in the fighting. He survived only due to his Twilight's Hammer followers. A few members of the clan took the wounded ogre aboard a ship and set sail from the tomb. The winds carried the vessel west, into uncharted waters. With vengeance served, the Black Tooth Grin orcs boarded their ships and sailed east. As proof of their victory, they retrieved Gul'dan's skull from one of the warlock's followers. The orc who had sold his race into demonic servitude was no more.
GUL'DAN RAISES THE TOMB OF SARGERAS
Far from the Tomb of Sargeras, the Horde continued its desperate retreat to Khaz Modan. The orcish army in the Hinterlands fought through Lothar's forces and raced toward the Thandol Span. Orgrim and his half of the Horde followed close behind. Lothar and Turalyon soon rallied, recombining their armies and storming after the retreating Horde. With his fleet gone, Orgrim had little choice but to retreat on foot. Long weeks of hard marching and sporadic battles with the Alliance had taken their toll on the orcish armies. Before long, Orgrim and the remnants of the Horde limped into Khaz Modan, pushing through the Wetlands and into the colder, mountainous parts of the region. En route to the dwarven homeland, Orgrim had dispatched dragon riders to look for the Black Tooth Grin and learn what had become of them. Some of these scouts returned with news. They had spotted the Black Tooth Grin sailing back toward Khaz Modan. The orc sailors had told the dragon riders of Gul'dan's demise. Orgrim took pleasure in this development. If nothing else, at least the traitorous warlock would never again manipulate the orc race. Orgrim only wished he'd been the one to deliver the killing blow. Yet the satisfaction of Gul'dan's death faded as Orgrim took stock of his forces. The war had annihilated over half of his armies. With the Black Tooth Grin still at sea, he had no navy. The Horde would not find victory in its current state. It wouldn't even be able to hold Khaz Modan against the Alliance, especially if the dwarves and the gnomes joined the fight. Orgrim dispatched a messenger to gather reinforcements from Draenor. Whether or not the bloodthirsty clans there were ready to fight mattered little. He needed them now. Then he ordered his soldiers to gather in Blackrock Spire, where they could wait until the reinforcements arrived. Blackrock Spire was deep in Horde-controlled territory. If the Alliance
chose to pursue, Doomhammer would make them pay for every step. He told Chieftain Kilrogg and his Bleeding Hollow to remain in Khaz Modan. Throughout the Second War, they had kept the dwarves and the gnomes confined in their mountain cities. Now they would have an even greater role. They would delay the Alliance army and prevent it from smashing into the Horde's rearguard. Doomhammer gathered Chieftain Zuluhed and as many able-bodied warriors from the Dragonmaw as he could. The dragon riders were still scattered across Lordaeron, but Orgrim knew that they were too valuable a weapon to simply abandon. He ordered Nekros to rally the remaining beasts of war at Grim Batol and then transport them, Alexstrasza, and the rest of his resources to Blackrock Spire. Orgrim also commanded the orc to send some of the dragon riders to seek out the Black Tooth Grin, inform them of the Horde's new rendezvous point, and guard their ships from any Alliance naval forces. Lothar knew that the Horde was wounded. One swift and merciless strike was all it would take to shatter the orcish army forever. Though the Alliance soldiers were fatigued from months of battle, Lothar pushed them onward. This was their chance to end the war. The Alliance's swift march south would have never been possible without Turalyon and the other paladins. The holy warriors worked day and night, mending the wounded and filling their hearts with resolve and courage. The Alliance soldiers poured into Khaz Modan and made short work of the Bleeding Hollow. The paladins led hunting parties to root out the orcs and drive them from the region. In defeating the Bleeding Hollow, the Alliance also liberated Ironforge and Gnomeregan. The Bronzebeard dwarves and the gnomes emerged from their mountain strongholds jubilant and eager for retribution. Both peoples pledged their forces to the Alliance. They would lend their hammers, axes, and technologies to the war effort. For the first time in the war, nearly every noble race in the Eastern Kingdoms was united.
Northwest of Khaz Modan, the Black Tooth Grin continued their sea voyage. Dragon riders sent by Nekros had found the vessels and delivered word of the Horde's retreat to Blackrock Spire. Dal'rend and Maim ordered the Black Tooth Grin to alter course and sail to Stormwind, which was still under Horde control. From there, the orcs would travel to Blackrock Spire by land. Yet if Dal'rend and Maim were hoping for an easy passage south, they wouldn't find it. Admiral Proudmoore was patrolling the waters. Near the island of Crestfall, the Alliance navy overtook the Horde fleet. Just as in the battle near Zul'Dare, Proudmoore outmaneuvered his foes and hammered them with cannon fire. And just as before, the Horde had dragons. The beasts swooped down from the skies and engulfed the Alliance ships in sheets of fire. This time, Proudmoore did not retreat. Wildhammer gryphon riders had arrived to support his fleet. After being defeated by dragons in Quel'Thalas, the dwarves had learned new tactics. They used their gryphons' mobility and speed to their advantage, outmaneuvering their larger foes and drawing their attention away from the Alliance boats. Lightning-infused stormhammers and dragon flame set the heavens alight, while cannon fire painted the waves red. Dal'rend and Maim's ship and a few other vessels escaped the battle intact, but most of the Horde's fleet was sunk by Proudmoore's superior forces. The dragon riders scattered in all directions, fleeing before the wrath of the fearless gryphon riders. The Alliance had won a decisive victory at sea and destroyed the Horde's navy, but the cost had been great. The red dragons had decimated Proudmoore's own ships. Many brave sailors had died, including the admiral's son. Proudmoore would never forget his child's death, and his hatred of the orcs would fester like an open wound until the end of his days.
From Blackrock Spire, Doomhammer watched the Alliance army wind into the Burning Steppes like a serpent of silver and gold. Thousands of Alliance soldiers arranged themselves around the Horde stronghold, and then they began their relentless siege. The fortress's gates would hold, but not for long enough. The dragon riders from Grim Batol hadn't arrived yet, and neither had the Black Tooth Grin clan or the reinforcements from Draenor. They would never get there in time. Despair took root in Doomhammer's heart, but he crushed it down the moment it reared its head. He would not give in. Not now. Not ever. This war was about more than glory, about more than him. It was about restoring honor to his race and ensuring its survival. Doomhammer had only two choices, the same two he'd always had: secure a home on Azeroth, or return to Draenor and die.
DEFEAT OF THE AMANI While the Alliance was besieging Blackrock Spire, King Anasterian led efforts to drive the Amani trolls from Quel'Thalas. The battles were costly, but the elves managed to secure their homeland. In the years to come, Anasterian would withdraw from the Alliance, accusing it of abandoning the high elves in their most desperate hour. Not all high elves believed that, but enough did.
If death was his fate, he would die in honorable combat, not by hunger or disease. In the fortress of Blackrock Spire, he stoked the fires of the Horde's bloodlust. He called on his forces for one last charge, one final battle to decide their destiny. They were the unstoppable Horde. They had conquered the draenei, Stormwind, and many other foes. This world called Azeroth was theirs for the taking, and the Alliance would not stand in their way. As Alliance siege engines hammered at the mountain, the metal gates suddenly yawned wide. Thousands of howling soldiers spilled from the stronghold. Orgrim himself led the Horde's assault. He was under no illusions that he could defeat the Alliance by force. Instead, he cut a path toward Lothar. Doomhammer had learned of human culture in recent years. Much like the orcs, the humans revered and idolized their leaders. Killing a chieftain could often break the will and resolve of an orc clan. Doomhammer hoped that striking down Lothar would have the same effect on the Alliance. The Horde's suicidal charge caught the Alliance off guard. Doomhammer stormed through the siege lines and launched himself at Lothar. The supreme commander did not flee. He met Doomhammer in single combat, just as any honorable warrior would. A hush fell over the Horde and Alliance soldiers near Doomhammer and Lothar. The crash of sword against hammer rang out across the Burning Steppes. Neither warrior gave ground. Not at first. But Orgrim was simply mightier than his opponent. The warchief shattered Lothar's greatsword with a swing of his warhammer. The Alliance commander fell to his knees. With his next merciless blow, Doomhammer crushed Lothar's skull. Watching their warchief vanquish the enemy commander inspired the orcs,
and they pressed their attack. Orgrim's gambit had paid off. He could see the sorrow and despair in his enemies' eyes. The Alliance soldiers were flagging. Many of them were losing their will to fight. Yet Turalyon did not give in to sorrow or despair. Such feelings were of no use to him. They would not bring Lothar back. They would not avenge his fallen friend. The young paladin unleashed his holy powers. The Light radiated out from Turalyon, blinding all around him, including Orgrim, and bringing the fighting to a standstill. The paladin took up Lothar's broken blade and knocked the stunned orc warchief unconscious. He then called on his allies to stand tall in this dark hour, just as Lothar would have. Through every trial the Alliance had faced, their commander had never hesitated. He had led them with wisdom and bravery. He had treated them as more than soldiers, as friends and family. They were all Lothar's sons and daughters, and they would carry on his dream of ridding the world of the Horde. Now was not the time for uncertainty, not when victory was within reach. Now was the time to fight. For Azeroth. For the Alliance. For Lothar. Hope burned bright in every Alliance soldier who heard Turalyon that day. With a final battle cry, the paladin rallied his comrades. The Alliance crashed into the Horde, and the orcish armies buckled from the onslaught. Some fled north, east, or west. Others raced south toward the Dark Portal. A brave few continued fighting outside Blackrock Spire, hoping for death in battle. They would not find it. Turalyon and the other paladins overwhelmed these soldiers, but they did not put them to the blade. They bound them, along with their warchief, in chains.
Led by Teron Gorefiend and his death knights, some of the Horde escaped the Alliance and fled toward the Dark Portal. Reaching the safety of their homeworld was their only hope of survival. Turalyon and the Alliance hounded their every step, the memory of Lothar's death still raw and painful. They were eager for vengeance, but just as eager to track the Horde to the Dark Portal. Little was known about the gateway or its exact location, and Turalyon hoped that the retreating orcs and death knights would lead him to it. They did. Outside the Dark Portal, in the Black Morass, the Alliance overtook the Horde. The battle that unfolded was one of the most brutal and desperate fought in the Second War. Gorefiend and his death knights called upon the fury and terror of their necromantic arts. They could not defeat Turalyon's forces, but it was enough to allow the Horde to slip through the portal. Turalyon did not pursue the Horde. He had already pushed his soldiers to the breaking point, and he did not know what horrors awaited them on the other side. There was only one thing left to do: destroy the Dark Portal and prevent the Horde from ever returning. For this, Turalyon called on Khadgar and his fellow magi. The sorcerers gathered around the looming gateway and began a great spell. Khadgar led the other magi as they unraveled the portal, pulling apart each ethereal thread until the rift slammed shut. The backlash of energies shattered the portal's stone frame in a blinding explosion of arcane light. The Dark Portal, which had brought so much ruin to Azeroth, crumbled to dust. A roar of approval sounded through the Alliance lines. The soldiers, who had fought so hard, who had seen their friends and loved ones die, fell to their knees in celebration. Many wept tears of joy. The war was over. The Alliance had won.
The Horde had lost. Such was the news that Teron Gorefiend and his followers carried back to Draenor. What was worse, the way to Azeroth was closed. When Khadgar had destroyed Azeroth's side of the Dark Portal, the resultant blast of arcane energy had lashed into the orcish homeworld, and the gateway on Draenor had exploded in a flash of errant magic. The portal's physical frame had shattered into rubble. There would be no escape from the Horde's dying world. After so much bloodshed and war, the orcs had accomplished nothing. They had little food and no enemy to conquer. They had no future except for a slow, agonizing death. Some powerful clans had remained on Draenor. As was the case before the First War, bloodlust consumed them. Over time, the orcs' numbers had dwindled, but they were still slaves to anger. Word of the Horde's defeat on Azeroth fueled their rage. It was only a matter of time before the Horde would consume itself from within. The remnants of the Horde on Azeroth were faring little better. Kilrogg and his Bleeding Hollow clan had not reached Blackrock Spire in time to join Doomhammer's forces. They'd witnessed the aftermath as some of the defeated Horde soldiers stumbled to the Dark Portal. Kilrogg had hoped to reach the gateway as well, but the Alliance army had barred his way. Rather than risk a suicidal charge to the portal, he'd pulled back his Bleeding Hollow. The orcs quietly disappeared into the wilds north of the gateway to plan their next move. Much like the Bleeding Hollow, the Dragonmaw at Grim Batol had not arrived at Blackrock Spire in time to aid Doomhammer. Seeing that the Alliance was triumphant, the orcs had retreated to their fortress. They barricaded themselves within the ancient stronghold and continued breeding and training their red dragons. If the Alliance ever discovered their presence,
at least the Dragonmaw would have weapons to fight with. Dal'rend, Maim, and the surviving members of the Black Tooth Grin were also still alive. They'd arrived at Blackrock Spire after the Horde had been defeated. The clan had gathered with other Horde survivors, mainly from the Blackrock clan, and waited until the Alliance had pulled its forces out of the region. With the way clear, the orcs had then snuck back into Blackrock Spire and taken control of the stronghold. Dal'rend and Maim blamed the Horde's defeat on Doomhammer. They'd despised the warchief ever since he'd struck down Blackhand in the mak'gora. The brothers now planned to reforge the Horde as they saw fit, but they knew it would take time. They gradually reached out to other large groups of Horde survivors, trying to rally them under their new banner. Kilrogg ignored them. He had seen his destiny, and he knew it did not lie with Dal'rend and Maim's "false" Horde. Yet the Dragonmaw did pledge their support to the orcs in Blackrock Spire. They offered to give some of their enslaved dragons to Dal'rend and Maim's forces if ever they were needed. Other members of the Horde scattered into the wilderness. Some traveled in packs. A few were alone. Among the solitary survivors was Eitrigg, the former handler of Garona. In the aftermath of defeat, he dwelled on everything the half-orc had told him about the dark forces manipulating the orcs. He began to believe what Garona had said, and his unquestioning loyalty to the Horde faded. Gul'dan's promises, the "benefactor" Kil'jaeden, the Dark Portal-none of these things had been what they'd seemed. Forming the Horde had not brought the orcs salvation; it had brought them doom. With shame and anger in his heart, Eitrigg disavowed the Horde. He struck out north in search of a place to spend the rest of his days. A place to die in peace.
While the remnants of the Horde struggled for survival, victory celebrations graced every Alliance city. Humans, dwarves, gnomes, and high elves reveled in their triumph. Yet when the jubilation passed, a harsh reality set in: life would never be the same. War had decimated the Eastern Kingdoms. The Horde had razed countless villages and cities. Corpses choked the roadways and mountain passes from Hillsbrad Foothills to Quel'Thalas. For nearly everyone who'd fought, the war did not end with the Dark Portal's destruction. Survivors were plagued by nightmares of the horrors they'd witnessed. Many soldiers had lost close friends. Some had even lost their entire families. Still others emerged from the war forever maimed and disabled. The struggle to find inner peace would be a long and arduous road, a battle more difficult than any of the survivors had faced against the Horde. Even Turalyon was haunted by what he'd seen. The death of his mentor, Lothar, pressed down like an iron fist on his heart. The temptation to withdraw into himself was strong, but Turalyon would not abandon people in need. He'd been promoted to supreme commander of the Alliance, and thousands now looked to him for guidance and leadership. Turalyon knew that the key to bringing life back to normal was rebuilding the Eastern Kingdoms. He spearheaded these efforts by gathering the Alliance leadership in Lordaeron. The rulers agreed to pool their resources to mend their war-ravaged nations. Due to its betrayal, Alterac did not take part in this meeting. The human leaders were still debating how to deal with the rogue kingdom, and the discussions would continue for many weeks.
ALLERIA AND TURALYON During the Second War, many members of the Alliance formed friendships. Some, like Alleria and Turalyon, even kindled closer relationships. The elf and the human were from different worlds, but they had been brought together in a way that only war could do. As the months passed and Alleria and Turalyon discovered more about each other, they grew close. The war and its aftermath would test their bonds. But in the end, their love would prevail.
Special importance was placed on rebuilding Stormwind. King Terenas of Lordaeron had pledged to aid the fallen kingdom and support Prince Varian Wrynn's ascension to the throne. For some, Stormwind was a powerful symbol of humanity's future. If even it could rise from the ashes, anyone could. Word of Stormwind's reconstruction was met with mixed feelings by the kingdom's refugees. Many of them refused to return to their broken home. Stormwind was a reminder of everything they'd lost. These refugees preferred to start their lives anew in Lordaeron. Yet other refugees did return to Stormwind, including Prince Varian Wrynn. Turalyon oversaw efforts to repatriate the kingdom's citizens and secure Varian's place as the next king. He surrounded the teenager with seasoned ministers and advisors to help him settle into his new role.
While Turalyon was occupied in Stormwind, his fellow paladins went to work in Lordaeron. The Order of the Silver Hand had been formed to fight the Horde, but its purpose did not end with the Dark Portal's destruction. The paladins coordinated with the Church of the Holy Light to help the Alliance move forward. They healed the sick and granted shelter to the survivors who were so broken by the war that they could no longer care for themselves.
Not all members of the Alliance were so focused on healing and rebuilding. Hatred of the orcs still burned in the hearts of many. Alleria Windrunner had seen countless elves perish in the Second War. Driven by revenge, she spent her days hunting down orcs who had escaped capture. It was her way to deal with the loss and sorrow brought on by the war. Alleria was not the only one hunting orcs. Groups of humans, elves, dwarves, and gnomes stalked the Eastern Kingdoms. They combed the deep wilds and remote mountains in search of their prey. The Alliance hunters captured many of the orcs they found. Others, they killed on sight, vengeance for loved ones who had died in the war. The question of what to do with the captured orcs became a subject of bitter debate. Gilneas and Stromgarde argued for the execution of the prisoners. Yet Lordaeron was against putting the orcs to the blade. The capacity for mercy proved that the Alliance was more civilized and honorable than the Horde. Rather than execute the orcs, Lordaeron wanted to lock them in internment camps-prisons to be funded by Alliance members. Dalaran's Kirin Tor also lobbied for imprisonment. After the First War, the Council of Tirisfal had faded from existence. The Kirin Tor now took charge over matters that the secret order had once specialized in, such as investigating demonic activity. Dalaran's magi wished to study the orcs and their strange magics, as much for the pursuit of knowledge as for strategic purposes. The Kirin Tor argued that by better understanding the orcs' strengths and weaknesses, they could defeat them if war ever broke out again. The Alliance eventually came to an agreement. The member nations would fund the construction of internment camps, which would house the orcs. One of Stromgarde's most celebrated soldiers, Danath Trollbane, would oversee these crude prisons. If order could be maintained, the camps would remain. If not, the Alliance would revisit executing the orcs. The camps did prove successful, but bitterness remained over their existence. Gilneas thought the prisons were a pointless burden on the Alliance. They were already spending a fortune rebuilding Stormwind, and
now more coin was being siphoned into keeping their enemies alive.
DURNHOLDE KEEP Though Danath Trollbane oversaw all of the camps, he delegated command of them to the Second War's high-ranking veterans. One prison outside Durnholde Keep in Hillsbrad Foothills fell under the control of a respected lord named Aedelas Blackmoore. During the First War, Blackmoore had discovered the infant orc Go'el and had taken him to Durnholde. Unbeknownst to the rest of the Alliance, he'd continued raising the young orc, whom he named "Thrall." In secret, Blackmoore plotted to mold Thrall into his own obedient general -a general who would one day lead the captive orcs against the Alliance. It was Blackmoore's hope that he could assert dominion over the human nations and reign as their king.
In the years that followed, the cost of maintaining the camps would remain a sticking point for Gilneas, and it would eventually drive the nation away from the Alliance.
Far to the south, Khadgar watched over the site where the Dark Portal had once stood. His heroics in the Second War had earned him the coveted title of archmage. Yet Khadgar had spent no time celebrating. He knew that the threat posed by the Horde was not over. The fel energies used by the Horde had killed much of the land surrounding the Dark Portal, and conditions were continuing to worsen. Even though the gateway had been destroyed, fel magic was somehow seeping into Azeroth. Khadgar eventually discovered that this was because a connection still existed between his world and Draenor. A lingering dimensional rift remained in the area. From it, fel energies from the orcish homeworld were affecting Azeroth. The rift resisted Khadgar's attempts to close it. Unless Khadgar and other magi held the fel magic at bay, it would creep across the Eastern Kingdoms and bleed the land of life. Khadgar and his fellow magi brought their findings before the Alliance. The archmage warned that as long as the dimensional rift was open, the possibility of another invasion remained. He called on the Alliance nations to fund a stronghold, Nethergarde Keep, to watch over the rift. From there, Khadgar and other magi would also neutralize the spreading fel magic. After considerable debate, Khadgar secured the resources he needed. Nethergarde Keep gradually arose atop a hilly outcropping overlooking the southern half of the Black Morass. From the construction site, Khadgar observed the broken landscape and measured its fel energies. He often mused about the orcish homeworld. What horrors lingered there? What had become of the orcs who had returned through the portal? Soon enough, he would find out.


Life after the Second War was stark for Draenor's orcs. Their world was still dying. Fel energies continued to spread, choking natural life into extinction. The demonic bloodlust coursing through their veins had not diminished, and too often orcs turned upon orcs, creating a whirlpool of chaos that threatened to drag the race down into oblivion. The Warsong and the Shattered Hand clans, in particular, had insatiable needs for violence. The closest the Horde had to a leader was Ner'zhul, the orc who had inadvertently led his people into the Burning Legion's clutches. Gul'dan had seen no use in bringing the elder shaman to Azeroth, and he had left him on Draenor. Ner'zhul had kept to his ancestral lands in Shadowmoon Valley. In time, Draenor's orcs had looked to him for guidance. Yet leadership was not a burden he wanted. Ner'zhul had fallen into despair. Day and night, visions of death plagued his broken mind. He saw orc skeletons littering a barren world. He'd even had a skull tattooed on his face, a practice shaman had long used to mark certain failed apprentices as "dead" to their people. For Ner'zhul, there seemed to be no way to save the Horde from doom. The invasion of Azeroth had been a desperate attempt to escape a slow death,
and it had failed. The orcs did not have the strength to try again. Teron Gorefiend, however, was not prepared to give up. He had seen Gul'dan's plans unravel, but he had also witnessed moments of incredible power. Conquering Azeroth? Perhaps it was impossible. Yet Gul'dan had gleaned knowledge from Medivh's mind, and he had told his death knights that there were many potent artifacts out there that were vulnerable, ripe for the taking. Gorefiend had three particular artifacts in mind. The first was the Book of Medivh, a tome that contained some of the Guardian's considerable power and his knowledge of blending different shades of magic together. The second was the Eye of Dalaran, a relic crafted by the Kirin Tor that could focus and amplify magical energies. The third was the Scepter of Sargeras. This artifact, created long ago by the Burning Legion, had the ability to open gateways between worlds. Gorefiend and his death knights cared only for themselves. They desired a new world that they could assert sole dominion over, but they knew they would need the Horde's help to escape Draenor. With the artifacts, the orcs could create new dimensional rifts. Not to Azeroth, but to other worlds where the Horde could settle. Yet these artifacts were back on Azeroth, and Gul'dan had not told his death knights of their exact locations. Even if Gorefiend could rebuild the Dark Portal, he would need the Horde's help to claim the instruments of power. This presented a challenge. None of the survivors trusted Gul'dan's former allies, especially the unholy death knights. Success depended on Ner'zhul. He was the only orc on Draenor who still had the influence to rally and lead the clans. Ner'zhul vehemently resisted Gorefiend's ideas. What good would a few relics of power do? How would they possibly save the orcs? More importantly, Gorefiend had betrayed Ner'zhul in years past. He had been one of Gul'dan's closest allies. How could Ner'zhul trust the death knight? Gorefiend persisted, telling Ner'zhul of how they could open new rifts to flee from their dying homeland. There were countless worlds out there in the cosmos. Even a weakened Horde would surely find one to conquer. Ner'zhul slowly relented. Gorefiend's plan was appealing. Draenor's decay weighed heavily upon Ner'zhul. He felt guilt for allowing the Legion to sink its claws into his people, and a fresh start on a fresh world might be
his only chance to redeem himself. He gathered the leaders of the remaining clans. Among them were Grommash Hellscream of the Warsongs, Kargath Bladefist of the Shattered Hand, and Fenris of the Thunderlords. Ner'zhul was stunned at how easily they agreed to his plans. Hellscream, Bladefist, and Fenris had been forced to sit out the entirety of the First and Second Wars. They thirsted for battle, any battle. The other clans wanted war, too. Any chance to escape Draenor was worth taking. Opening the Dark Portal for the first time had required tremendous amounts of magical energy. Restoring the rift to its former size would be far simpler. The bridge between worlds still existed, albeit in a diminished form. Teron Gorefiend told Ner'zhul that the lingering power kept within the Skull of Gul'dan would be more than enough to reconstruct the Dark Portal. That was a fortunate bit of news, for the skull had been brought back to Draenor by Horde refugees. In the time since the Dark Portal had slammed shut, the skull had passed between orcs, traded and fought over as a prized trinket. After claiming the skull, Ner'zhul and the death knights began their great convocation. He could only hope that the Alliance would be unprepared.
In the waning months of the Second War, Garona had wandered the land on her own. She could still feel the Shadow Council's dark presence in her mind, trying to bend her thoughts. She could not trust her actions around friend or foe. Slowly, patiently, she fought her way back into control, shrugging away as many of Gul'dan's lingering mental chains as she could. Finally, she was confident she could resist the Shadow Council's orders. That meant Garona was ready to visit the one person she still trusted in the world: Khadgar. Under the cover of darkness, she infiltrated Nethergarde Keep and snuck into Khadgar's private quarters as he slept. They had not seen each other since their battle against Medivh. They had much to discuss. Garona told him of her activities during the Second War, and she also openly confessed to assassinating King Llane. Khadgar believed her when she said she had been compelled to do it by Gul'dan; he could sense the Shadow Council's mangled spellwork still woven through her thoughts. The presence of these dark enchantments proved something else: at least one member of the Shadow Council was still alive and on Azeroth. Were that not the case, the spells would have lost their potency the moment Gul'dan had died. Someone was trying to maintain his links to his old puppets. Over several months, Khadgar secretly met with Garona outside Nethergarde Keep, carefully unravelling the Shadow Council's hold on her. He was successful. Garona, for the first time in her life, was free. In gratitude, Garona offered to do whatever she could to hunt down the Shadow Council on Azeroth. Khadgar eagerly accepted. Of late, he had been sensing strange energies radiating from the nearby rift, and he was concerned that forces on Draenor were working to expand it. He asked Garona to remain in the area, hidden from the Alliance, while he investigated.
Before long, Khadgar sent a message to many of the Alliance's leaders, asking them to meet in Nethergarde Keep at once. There was some reluctance. The Second War had only recently ended, and most nations were still working to rebuild. Nonetheless, the leaders traveled to the keep. Once there, they understood Khadgar's urgency. He and the other magi had managed to stop the spreading fel energies, but not before they had turned the southern half of the Black Morass into a wasteland. The keep's garrison had taken to calling the region "the Blasted Lands." The northern portion of the Black Morass, still teeming with life, had been renamed the Swamp of Sorrows in honor of those who had died in the Second War. The sight of the Blasted Lands was a sobering reminder of the dark forces the Alliance had stopped...and of what they might be called upon to stop again. But the state of the land wasn't the truly bad news. Khadgar told the leaders that there had been unmistakable surges of fel magic where the Dark Portal had once stood. He feared that the orcs were attempting to expand the existing rift and pass through it. The gathered leaders agreed to give Khadgar their full support. War-weary as they all were, they had no intention of allowing the Horde to gain another foothold on this world. Turalyon coordinated the military effort from Stormwind, where he was in the midst of helping the kingdom rebuild. He tasked Danath Trollbane, one of the Second War's most prominent veterans, with leading a small army to the Blasted Lands. In the meantime, Turalyon would rally the rest of the Alliance forces for the march south. Unfortunately, the Horde's invasion was already under way.

Just a few weeks after Khadgar warned the Alliance of the impending threat, Ner'zhul finally succeeded. Drawing on the Skull of Gul'dan's energies, he expanded the rift between Draenor and Azeroth. Almost immediately, Grommash Hellscream led the spear tip of the Horde's invasion force-the Warsong, Shattered Hand, Thunderlord, and Laughing Skull clans-into the Blasted Lands. These soldiers were joined by Gorefiend and his death knights. The orcs began constructing a physical frame around the dimensional rift, creating a new Dark Portal that could remain open permanently without needing a constant influx of power. Kilrogg Deadeye and his Bleeding Hollow clan had been watching over the Blasted Lands for any sign of the Horde's return. They met with Grommash and the death knights, informing them of what had happened on Azeroth after the Second War. The information would prove invaluable in the days ahead. Gorefiend ordered Kilrogg and his people back to Draenor. They had fought for survival since the end of the war, and they deserved time to rest. By the time Danath's meager army arrived at the Dark Portal, the Horde had brought many soldiers to Azeroth. The humans stood little chance against their enemy's superior numbers. Brutal, close-quarters combat erupted across the southern edge of the Blasted Lands. Danath was the only member of his army to leave the battle alive. He retreated to Nethergarde Keep, where he hoped to use its garrison. Despite the earlier defeat, Danath was confident he could contain the orcish armies in the region until the rest of the Alliance arrived. He wasn't wrong. The orcs did not have the numbers needed to mount a true invasion. But conquest was not their objective this time. The Horde's fearsome soldiers made a show of preparing for a full-scale assault. Meanwhile, Gorefiend and his death knights led a hunting party beyond the Blasted Lands in search of the artifacts. The group was composed of death knights and orcs, including Chieftain Fenris. Few Alliance soldiers
noticed their departure, and none guessed their purpose. Garona did. She began to track them, trying to discern what they were searching for.
Deathwing had gone into hiding shortly after the Second War ended. His plan had failed-the orcs had not conquered Azeroth-but there had been some small victories. Much of the red dragonflight, along with its leader, Alexstrasza, was still under the Dragonmaw clan's control. The other Aspects had not yet taken action against the orcs. Most of the dragons feared falling prey to the Demon Soul and suffering Alexstrasza's fate. The human kingdoms had also experienced heavy losses, and they needed time to recover. When he sensed the rift to Draenor expanding, Deathwing wondered if the orcs had somehow managed to replenish their numbers for yet another war at full strength, but it soon became clear that their "invasion" was only a feint. Conquest was not their purpose. And yet, Deathwing was intrigued. He decided to take on human form once again and influence the Alliance's response to the Horde. This tactic had been very effective during the First War. There was another political crisis taking place. The Alliance was furious at Alterac's betrayal, and there was much debate as to how the kingdom should be punished-or if it even deserved to exist. Lordaeron had become the place where these debates were held. Deathwing returned there in a new human form, casting himself as a minor noble named Lord Daval Prestor, a distant cousin of King Perenolde. Having an apparent connection to Alterac royalty gave his words weight. Prestor advised Lordaeron's king, Terenas, to establish martial law in Alterac until the line of succession could be settled. This move split the attentions of the Alliance army, weakening its response to the Horde's new invasion. The human leaders found Prestor to be charming, endearing, and refreshingly pragmatic. He showed no signs of being prickly about the pride of "his people," and he seemed to have only the best interests of the Alliance at heart. With the Alliance snared in unnecessary turmoil, Deathwing formed his endgame to restore his black dragonflight to its former power and glory. The
human nations were unlikely to suffer serious damage from the Horde's invasion, and thus his plans on Azeroth would not advance. Any attempt to reestablish the black dragonflight would be noticed by the Alliance and, more importantly, by the other Dragon Aspects. Perhaps the solution to that problem did not lie on Azeroth at all. The orcs' homeworld, Draenor...The other dragonflights could not threaten Deathwing there. It mattered little that the world was blighted. Dragons did not need to live off the land the same way mortals did. Deathwing moved to make contact with the Horde once again.
As battle engulfed the Blasted Lands, Gorefiend led the Horde's covert hunting party north. Of the three artifacts he sought, he knew only the Book of Medivh's location. He had learned it was in Alterac, a kingdom far from the Dark Portal. Gorefiend's forces quietly traveled to Blackrock Spire to make contact with Blackhand's sons, Dal'rend and Maim. Through their alliance with the Dragonmaw in Grim Batol, they had access to red dragons. Gorefiend desperately needed these creatures to expedite his journey to Alterac. The meeting was disastrous. Dal'rend had declared himself warchief of the "true Horde." He considered Ner'zhul a coward and a usurper, and he had no intention of helping him with his plans. Gorefiend left empty-handed, but he was soon approached by Deathwing. He offered the death knight and his allies a deal: he would lend his black dragons to help the Horde retrieve what it needed; in exchange, the Horde would transport "precious items" to Draenor. As a sign of trust, Deathwing told Gorefiend the exact locations of the other two artifacts, as well as the dangers his forces might face while retrieving them. One was in Dalaran, and the other was deep within the Tomb of Sargeras. Gorefiend was in no position to turn Deathwing down. He split his forces into three raiding parties. Black dragons would transport them to collect the artifacts immediately. Gorefiend suspected that obtaining the Book of Medivh would be the most difficult of the three tasks, so he decided to handle it personally. Deathwing had warned him that Alterac was under martial law, so Gorefiend expected stiff resistance. The Alliance forces occupying the city were utterly unprepared to face dragons and death knights; when the Horde raiders arrived, most of the soldiers fled in terror. Gorefiend infiltrated the castle and found King Perenolde. The human was erratic, boisterous, making demands; his sanity had slipped away, in truth. Deathwing had made sure his "distant cousin" had lost his mind so that the king could not contradict the lies the dragon was telling in Lordaeron.
Bemused, Gorefiend humored Perenolde's fantasies for a few moments, and then he agreed to wipe out the Alliance occupying force in exchange for the artifact. Such chaos would only help divide humanity's attention, giving him more time to complete his task. With the Book of Medivh in their possession, the death knight and his followers left the mad king alive and made their retreat from the city. Gorefiend kept his word: the Alliance soldiers stationed in Alterac could do little to fight off the black dragons' relentless onslaught, and the garrison was eradicated.
While Gorefiend and his forces were assaulting Alterac, the fighting at Nethergarde Keep ground to a bloody stalemate. Turalyon had arrived with Alliance reinforcements. Alongside Khadgar and Danath's soldiers, they kept the Horde contained. Yet the humans couldn't shake the suspicion that the orcs were not throwing their full might into the invasion. Alliance scouts stayed on the alert for unexpected maneuvers, but none came. The Horde seemed content to test Nethergarde's defenses day after day without trying to overwhelm the keep. As the days passed, more and more Alliance reinforcements arrived at the keep, enough to not only defend the walls but also launch counterattacks against the Horde. The siege was eventually forced back into the empty, open landscape of the Blasted Lands. That should have spelled the end of the invasion...but it didn't. The orcs continued to fight, maintaining a skirmish line for no apparent reason. They sacrificed warriors to hold or retake useless ground. Khadgar's suspicions grew into an unnerving theory: the Horde was buying time for some other purpose. The invasion was just a distraction. To find answers, Alliance forces captured one of the enemy. They brought him back to the keep for interrogation. Turalyon led the questioning, calling on the Holy Light to draw out information from the orc. The captive eventually talked and confirmed what Khadgar feared. The Horde's new leader, Ner'zhul, had no interest in conquest. Small raiding parties had spread across Azeroth under the Alliance's noses, searching for powerful artifacts. There was no telling where they had gone or exactly what they were looking for.
North of the Blasted Lands, time was running out for Gorefiend. He'd hoped that the other two hunting parties had already obtained their artifacts. They hadn't. When he joined his forces that had set out for Dalaran, he was furious to learn that they hadn't been able to sense the Eye of Dalaran. Deathwing revealed the reason why. Dalaran's Kirin Tor magi had cast wards on the relic, keeping it from being sensed from a distance. Fortunately for the Horde, the Kirin Tor had no idea they were under scrutiny. They had enchanted the Eye of Dalaran simply because it was important, not because the magi believed anyone would be foolish enough to try to steal it. Though Gorefiend and his followers could not detect the artifact's exact location, Deathwing was more sensitive to such things. He instructed the hunters where they could find it. He then gathered his black dragons and assaulted Dalaran's outer defenses, providing a distraction that Gorefiend and a small group of death knights could use to sneak into the city. As magi rushed to defend their home from the dragons, Gorefiend and his followers crept through Dalaran's streets. Soon enough, they discovered the Eye of Dalaran, locked in an enchanted vault. Gorefiend shattered the containment wards placed around the artifact. And in doing so, he attracted unwanted attention. One of the most powerful leaders in the Kirin Tor, Archmage Antonidas, raced to investigate the source of the disturbance. He and a handful of magi battled the death knights in the vault, but the element of surprise was on the Horde's side. Gorefiend and his allies killed one of the magi and escaped with the artifact. Antonidas gave chase for as long as he could, but once the hunters had reunited with the black dragons, they vanished into the skies. All the archmage could do now was warn Khadgar.
The third hunting party could not make the journey to the Tomb of Sargeras entirely on the backs of black dragons. The distance was immense, and there were no islands en route where the creatures could land and rest. Even for Deathwing's mighty servants, such a journey was beyond their ability. The hunters needed to find another way to reach the tomb. They settled on stealing ships from the same harbor where Warchief Doomhammer had overseen the construction of the Horde fleet. The site had fallen under Alliance control and been renamed Menethil Harbor in honor of Lordaeron's king. There were plenty of ships, but many of them were Alliance vessels under the command of Admiral Daelin Proudmoore. Despite the risks, the hunters had little choice but to take ships. Their only advantage was the element of surprise. The Alliance navy would certainly not expect to fight black dragons and members of the Horde. In that, the hunters were wrong. When Gorefiend had set out on his quest, he had been followed. Garona had kept her distance, observing the death knight's pact with Deathwing. When the hunting parties had separated in three directions, Garona had to choose which to follow. She had shadowed the group that traveled to Menethil Harbor, believing that it was seeking out the Tomb of Sargeras. As the hunting party planned its assault on the harbor, Garona went to work. She could not warn the humans directly-they would not listen to an orc-but she knew their language well. She scrawled a note to warn about the impending attack, and she made sure the Alliance would find it. It was a simple matter. She showed herself to the harbor's guards, and when they gave chase, she dropped the missive and ran. The incident gained attention immediately. An orc intruder leaving notes was not something seen every day, and the information in it was hard to believe. Yet when the black dragons swooped down a few hours later, the humans were not completely unprepared. A bloody confrontation erupted in the harbor, and the hunting party only managed to steal a few small, slow ships.
They sailed them clumsily out to sea while the black dragons burned any vessels that attempted to pursue. Garona was unable to follow. She traveled as quickly as she could back to the Blasted Lands to tell Khadgar what had happened. The voyage to the Tomb of Sargeras was slow and miserable, on ships not meant for the open ocean. When the hunting party arrived, they had to fight their way through the swarm of demons that had killed Gul'dan, taking great losses. The Scepter of Sargeras was indeed inside the tomb, and the hunting party claimed it. It was well worth the journey. The artifact's ability to open rifts in the fabric of reality would make it critical to Ner'zhul's efforts back on Draenor. Only a scant few members of the hunting party made the journey back to the Eastern Kingdoms. When the hunters finally reunited with Gorefiend at the Dark Portal, the death knights made preparations to return to Draenor. Deathwing had already brought them enormous carts loaded with his "precious cargo." The objects were heavy, large, and enchanted-mortal eyes could not see what lay within the crude containers, and magical energies seemed to have no effect on them. The contents were of little concern to Gorefiend. He wanted only to finish his mission. Deathwing was satisfied. The Horde would carry a huge clutch of black dragon eggs to Draenor, and soon he would join them to oversee the rebirth of his dragonflight.
Gorefiend suspected that after the Horde's latest attack on Azeroth, the Alliance might seek to invade Draenor. He left behind a large number of soldiers to prevent this from happening. This force was composed mainly of Warsong orcs led by Hellscream, along with the mok'nathal Rexxar. With this small army in place, Gorefiend and the rest of the Horde returned to Draenor. Their departure was noticed by the Alliance, and it did not bode well. Based on what he had learned from Archmage Antonidas and Garona, Khadgar began piecing together the Horde's objective. Some of it was incomprehensible to him-he knew of dragons, but Deathwing was not a creature most mortals were aware of-but all of it seemed sinister in nature. Khadgar only learned the true scope of the Horde's plans after the Alliance captured a death knight. The archmage bombarded his prisoner with arcane magic, forcing him to reveal all he knew of Ner'zhul's intentions. At last, everything was clear. Ner'zhul and the Horde were planning to escape their dying world by creating new portals, and they had stolen the artifacts to do so. When Khadgar told Turalyon of what he'd learned, they both agreed that they could not allow the Horde to invade another world. No other land should suffer as Azeroth had. Yet it was possible the Alliance's other heroes wouldn't feel the same way. Launching a campaign into Draenor would require an army, and casualties would likely be high. Turalyon and Khadgar both feared that there might not be much of an appetite for battle among the soldiers who had already spent years fighting to protect Azeroth from the Horde. It was time to find out. Turalyon raised his banner, declaring that he would lead this army-the "Sons of Lothar"-into the orcish homeworld and end the Horde forever. Not all of the Alliance's soldiers answered the call, but most did. Nearly every one of the Second War's most revered heroes-including Alleria Windrunner, Danath Trollbane, and Kurdran Wildhammer-brought their
forces to Nethergarde Keep in preparation for war. Garona wanted to join the expedition force, even if it was only in secret. Khadgar knew he could use her knowledge of Draenor to his advantage, but he had a different task for her. They both knew that members of the Shadow Council were still alive on Azeroth. He convinced the half-orc to stay behind, hunt them down, and kill them all. The Sons of Lothar smashed through Hellscream's warriors, forcing them to scatter into the far corners of the Blasted Lands. With the way clear, the Alliance expedition force marched through the Dark Portal and laid eyes upon Draenor for the first time. The sight shocked them. They stood on land that had once been Tanaan Jungle; now it was Hellfire Peninsula, a barren wasteland of red earth stretching endlessly into the distance. The Sons of Lothar faced no real resistance in those first days. The orcish forces had not expected to be chased back to Draenor. Yet word of the invasion soon spread throughout the Horde.
Gorefiend brought all of his cargo to Hellfire Citadel, where Warchief Ner'zhul was waiting. By now, the Horde had received word that Alliance forces were streaming through the Dark Portal. Time had grown short, and Ner'zhul was anxious to begin. He was stunned, however, to see the full measure of what Gorefiend had brought back. Not only had he obtained the three artifacts, but he had also returned with a large number of suspicious carts. These items belonged to a surprise guest: Deathwing. The black dragon and other members of his flight had come through the Dark Portal disguised as orcs so as not to draw attention to themselves. Ner'zhul was initially terrified of Deathwing. Even though the dragon was not wearing his true form, he radiated immense power. Deathwing sensed the potent Skull of Gul'dan in Ner'zhul's presence, and he demanded it for himself. The warchief balked at this request, but only for a moment. He was in no position to resist a creature like Deathwing, and he had no further need of the skull. Its purpose had been to reopen the Dark Portal. Deathwing was interested in using the skull's lingering energies to strengthen his dragonflight and accelerate the growth of his eggs and whelps. As a token of "friendship," Deathwing left a portion of his black dragons with the Horde to protect Hellfire Citadel against the Alliance's invasion. With the Skull of Gul'dan in his possession, Deathwing left Hellfire Citadel. He settled on Gorgrond as a suitable place to hide his clutch of black dragon eggs. Meanwhile, Ner'zhul put his own plans into action. The gathered artifacts would grant him enough power to open portals to other worlds, but he needed to find a place to begin the ritual. The Dark Portal's location had been chosen because it rested on a convergence of magical ley lines, but now that was in Alliance hands. The only other nexus of ley lines Ner'zhul knew about was at the site of the Black Temple. He ordered the bulk of the Horde to accompany him to that location. The warchief left Kargath Bladefist and his Shattered Hand at
Hellfire Citadel to hold the Alliance army at bay.
Khadgar and Turalyon both agreed that stopping Ner'zhul was their highest priority. If he were to fall, the Horde's plan to escape to other worlds would collapse. Believing that Ner'zhul was still in Hellfire Citadel, the Sons of Lothar launched an all-out offensive against the stronghold. Chieftain Bladefist and his Shattered Hand had dug in at the citadel for a siege. The orcs had hoped to hold the Alliance at bay for a week. Their defenses fell before the first day ended. Even with the help of black dragons, Kargath simply had no means to repel simultaneous attacks from dwarf gryphon riders in the sky and soldiers on the ground. Once Khadgar and his fellow magi joined the fray, Kargath had to abandon his position and flee into the wastes. The Sons of Lothar were victorious, but they had no time to rest or rejoice. The presence of black dragons at Hellfire Citadel was an ill omen. What was worse, Khadgar discovered that Ner'zhul had marched southwest with the rest of the Horde and most of his potent artifacts. Strangely, the archmage did not sense the Skull of Gul'dan moving with them. He felt its presence somewhere in the north. Khadgar knew that the Sons of Lothar could not simply focus on Ner'zhul. The archmage needed the Skull of Gul'dan to destroy Draenor's side of the Dark Portal. After much debate, Turalyon decided to split his forces. One half would track down the Skull of Gul'dan. The other would apprehend Ner'zhul and the artifacts in his possession. Khadgar, Turalyon, and Alleria Windrunner led the forces that sought out the Skull of Gul'dan to the north. Danath Trollbane and Kurdran Wildhammer pursued Ner'zhul to the south. The chaos of the coming battles would soon overwhelm both sides of the war.
Ner'zhul and the orcs were disappointed to hear how fast Hellfire Citadel had fallen, but they already had a considerable head start on the Alliance. The Horde knew this land, and they were moving quickly. It didn't seem possible that their enemies could catch up to them. Unfortunately for Ner'zhul, Kurdran Wildhammer and his gryphon riders had decided to scout ahead. They found the warchief and his small army at the edge of the Bone Wastes, west of Shadowmoon Valley. The dwarves rained hell upon the orcs, bombarding them with impunity. Unless Ner'zhul and his people found a safer route to the Black Temple, they would soon die. There was only one such path nearby: through the draenei tomb city of Auchindoun. Much of the holy site was in ruins, but many of its crypts and tunnels were intact. During the Horde's war against the draenei, Gorefiend had learned much about Auchindoun. He knew of little-used passageways that led toward Shadowmoon Valley-paths that Ner'zhul and his forces could travel through to elude the Sons of Lothar and get closer to their destination. Auchindoun was a haunted and twisted place. It would not be safe to enter, but Ner'zhul had no alternative. As he led his forces into the tomb, the gryphon riders launched a bold new attack-one that they would soon regret. Kurdran was knocked from his mount and captured by the Horde. Before the other dwarves could rescue him, he was taken into Auchindoun's darkened corridors. Kilrogg Deadeye interrogated Kurdran, hoping to learn about the Alliance's true numbers. The dwarf held his tongue even under unspeakable torture. Danath Trollbane's ground forces were not far away. When they arrived at Auchindoun, some of the gryphon riders explained the situation. It would be very dangerous to rescue Kurdran. In Auchindoun's tight quarters, a large force was little more effective than a small one, and the orcs knew the terrain. They would be capable of outmaneuvering Danath, no matter how many troops he brought with him.
An unexpected source of aid presented itself. An Outcast arakkoa named Grizzik had been following the Sons of Lothar as they pursued the Horde south. He had no love for the Horde. Years ago, Chieftain Kargath had toppled the high arakkoan capital, Skyreach. His orcs had killed nearly all of its inhabitants, and they had captured high arakkoa and thrown them into the cursed Sethekk Hollow. Grizzik was one of these unfortunate prisoners. He emerged from Sethekk Hollow as an Outcast, warped and twisted by the region's shadowy energies. Eager for vengeance, Grizzik offered to lead the Alliance through Auchindoun. Guided by the arakkoa, Danath and his soldiers stormed through the tomb city. They moved carefully, avoiding the Horde's ambushes, and methodically searched Auchindoun. In time, they liberated Kurdran. Yet Ner'zhul was nowhere to be found. Only Kilrogg and the remnants of his Bleeding Hollow clan stalked Auchindoun. They had volunteered to occupy the Alliance while the rest of the Horde escaped to the Black Temple. It was not simply nobility that drove Kilrogg to make this sacrifice. Years ago, he had performed a ritual that granted him a vision of his own death. He now realized that Auchindoun was the place where he would breathe his last breath. The Bleeding Hollow fell upon the Alliance forces. As blood spilled across Auchindoun, Danath confronted Kilrogg. The two engaged in a brutal duel that echoed through the tomb city's halls until Danath plunged his blade through the orc's throat. With their chieftain dead, the rest of the Bleeding Hollow scattered or surrendered. Kilrogg's sacrifice was not in vain. He had given Ner'zhul the time he would need to safely reach the Black Temple with the rest of the Horde.
Gorgrond was inhospitable terrain, the perfect place for Deathwing to build a refuge from those who could not fly. He and his black dragons swooped down on the mountains in force, seeking out safe places for his eggs. Though the land was barren, it was not unoccupied. Gorgrond was home to the gronn who had survived Draenor's slow decay. The mightiest of these giants was known as Gruul. He lorded over a number of ogres and lesser gronn who dwelled in the mountains. Gruul's kind were highly territorial, not prone to living in close proximity with one another. But the calamities that had befallen Draenor had changed them. The gronn now joined forces in order to survive. Gruul and his followers had no intention of allowing intruders to conquer their home. They fought back, surprising the black dragons with their ferocity. Deathwing ignored the gronn, seeing them as little more than pests. He focused on finding a number of hiding places for his unhatched children while the rest of his dragonflight fought the native creatures. His arrogance led to the ruination of his plans. While Deathwing was distracted, the Sons of Lothar arrived in Gorgrond, searching for the Skull of Gul'dan. The Alliance soldiers were deeply unsettled by what they had found. Battles between black dragons and gronn had resulted in many deaths. Gruul and his followers had taken to impaling their slain enemies on spikes, displaying their corpses to all. The gronn nearly turned on the Sons of Lothar with violence, but Khadgar and Turalyon were quickly able to demonstrate that the Alliance was also the enemy of the black dragonflight. They struck a simple bargain with Gruul. If he gave them safe passage through Gorgrond, they would help him defeat Deathwing. The gronn and the Alliance prepared an ambush at the largest cache of Deathwing's eggs, nestled in one of Gorgrond's barren valleys. The Sons of Lothar wasted little time; they destroyed as many of the unguarded eggs as they could, hoping to lure Deathwing into the open.
When Deathwing learned of their actions, he and his draconic followers appeared in the skies and unleashed their molten fury on the intruders. It was just the moment Gruul had been waiting for. The massive gronn scaled Gorgrond's mountains to battle Deathwing with his bare fists. Meanwhile, Khadgar lashed Deathwing with his arcane power, ripping apart the metal plates bolted to the black Dragon Aspect's spine. Deathwing's body began to come apart. Molten energies burst forth from his broken form, spilling fire and magma across Gorgrond. The pain was so great that it forced him to drop the Skull of Gul'dan. If he had taken only a few more wounds, he might have died on Draenor that day. Instead, Deathwing abandoned his plans, flying straight back to Azeroth through the Dark Portal (and over the heads of many startled Alliance soldiers). Deathwing would never forget what happened to him that day. He swore vengeance on those who had attacked him, particularly on Khadgar. As fighting continued between the gronn and the other black dragons, Khadgar and the rest of the Sons of Lothar collected the Skull of Gul'dan. Then they beat a hasty retreat, fearing that Gruul and his followers would turn on them once they had defeated the dragons. When the fighting in Gorgrond was done, most of the black dragons were dead or dying. Gruul reasserted his dominion over the land. His battle with Deathwing would earn him newfound respect among his followers, and he would become known as the Dragonkiller.
GRUUL FACES DEATHWING
Having recovered the Skull of Gul'dan, Turalyon turned his forces south. Shadowmoon Valley was far, but he had magic to help him expedite the journey. Khadgar and his fellow magi opened a series of portals through which the Sons of Lothar reached southern Draenor. Outside the Black Temple, the two halves of the Alliance army reunited. Yet they had not reached the city in time to stop Ner'zhul. What was worse, the Horde had prepared for their arrival. The remnants of the orcish army had dug in around the Black Temple to keep the Sons of Lothar back. Much to Khadgar's dismay, he sensed potent energies lashing out from atop the Black Temple. Ner'zhul and his followers were in the midst of preparing their spell to open new portals. There was no time for a drawn-out siege, no time to find a way around the Black Temple's guardians. The Sons of Lothar launched themselves against the city and crashed into the defenders. While battle raged, Khadgar and his fellow magi hunted for Ner'zhul, hoping to reach him and disrupt his spellwork. They would not succeed. Atop the city's largest tower, Ner'zhul had gathered some of the death knights and a number of Shadowmoon orcs to help him with his spellwork and protect him from the Alliance. He and his followers had harnessed the power of the Eye of Dalaran, the Book of Medivh, and the Scepter of Sargeras. Ner'zhul tapped into the nexus of ley lines beneath the Black Temple, but he was woefully unprepared for the amount of skill needed for this ritual. He was desperate to succeed, and his recklessness caused the energies at his command to spiral out of control. As planned, Ner'zhul blasted multiple holes through the fabric of reality, but they were followed by others. Many others. The magic that Ner'zhul had unleashed destabilized Draenor's ley lines. Unimaginable forces began to tear open rifts across Draenor. With each passing moment, the world groaned louder in upheaval. Fissures erupted across land and sea.
Khadgar and the other magi arrived just as this chain reaction was unfolding. They managed to recover the Eye of Dalaran and the Book of Medivh, but not the Scepter of Sargeras. With the artifact in hand, Ner'zhul and a few of his closest followers escaped into the nearest portal. Ner'zhul had saved himself but doomed his world.
Khadgar had recovered most of the stolen artifacts, but the damage to Draenor had already been done. The unstable rifts opening across the land would soon shatter the world and almost certainly kill everyone on it. Even worse, the destructive energies would blast through the Dark Portal into Azeroth. After consulting with Turalyon, Khadgar knew what needed to be done. The Sons of Lothar would have to destroy the Dark Portal to protect their homeworld, and they would have to do so from Draenor. With chaos unfolding all around, there was no time to gather on Azeroth and perform the task there. It was a suicide mission, but no one hesitated. The energies lashing across the world hampered Khadgar's own magical abilities, preventing him from creating a portal to Hellfire Peninsula. He and his allies were forced to use gryphons to reach the Dark Portal. Khadgar, Turalyon, Alleria, Kurdran, Danath, and a number of other expedition members made the journey.
NER'ZHUL OPENS COUNTLESS PORTALS ACROSS DRAENOR Most of the Alliance soldiers stationed at Hellfire Citadel had already retreated back to Azeroth, but now the remnants of the Horde were scrambling through the Dark Portal as well. And the orcs were none too pleased to see that someone had come to close off their only means of fleeing. The two sides crashed together outside the yawning gateway in their desperate attempt to escape oblivion. As the battle raged, Khadgar and the other magi unleashed the raw power contained within the Skull of Gul'dan, trying to touch as little of its fel essence as possible. Turalyon and his forces encircled the sorcerers and fended off the terrified orcs who sought to flee from their world.
The magi's spellwork ignited a massive explosion that destroyed the Dark Portal's stone frame and severed the bridge between Azeroth and Draenor. Yet there was little time to savor the victory. The magical stress unleashed by Ner'zhul's spell was still spreading through the world, and it was growing more destructive by the moment. As violent earthquakes shook the land and continents fell away, Khadgar and the Sons of Lothar ran through an open rift nearby, not knowing where it would take them or whether they would survive. Only moments later, the world itself ripped apart. Draenor, the realm touched by Aggramar and shaped by the primals and the breakers, the realm of the glorious Apexis civilization and the mystical orc clans, was no more.
The orcs who had escaped through the Dark Portal before it closed brought grim tidings to the Horde on Azeroth: their homeworld was gone. Ner'zhul had sacrificed everyone to save himself and a handful of his loyal followers. It seemed impossible that anyone else could have survived Draenor's destruction. For Chieftain Grommash, this news was devastating. His only surviving family-his son, Garrosh-had still been on Draenor, in the Mag'har camp. Grommash put aside his grief and led his Warsong clan north to take shelter in the isolated Swamp of Sorrows. He was not giving up; he was merely regrouping. Grommash believed that there would never be peace between the orcs and the humans, and he wanted his fighters to be ready for battle. The members of the "true Horde" regarded the news about Draenor as confirmation that they were the rightful successors to Warchief Blackhand's rule. In the years to come, Dal'rend and Maim would strengthen their forces. The Dragonmaw in Grim Batol would do much the same. Zuluhed and many of their clan had returned to Draenor at the end of the Second War. Yet with news of their homeworld's destruction, the Dragonmaw on Azeroth believed that their leader was dead. Nekros took command over his people. He ordered them to continue lording over Alexstrasza and her red dragons in Grim Batol. Other members of the Horde saw no reason to keep fighting the Alliance. The noble mok'nathal Rexxar believed the rest of his people had perished on Draenor, and he was disgusted by everything that had transpired in recent years. His loyalties were now dust. Rexxar retreated into Azeroth's wilds, and he wandered the world in solitude. Tucked away in the Alterac Mountains, Drek'Thar and the Frostwolf clan carved out a new home. They isolated themselves from other orcs in the hopes of escaping the Alliance's wrath. It was a harsh and lonely existence, but it was not without its benefits. Drek'Thar had rekindled his connection with the elements, and he used them to keep his people safe. Far from the Eastern Kingdoms, Cho'gall and the Twilight's Hammer clan
knew nothing of Draenor's fate. Even if they had, it wouldn't have mattered. The whispers of the Old Gods were calling to them. Cho'gall and his followers sailed toward the distant continent of Kalimdor in search of their dark masters, eager to help them bring about the Hour of Twilight. They did not know they were being followed. Garona had picked up Cho'gall's trail, and she tracked the former Shadow Council member to the mysterious lands of Kalimdor.
Many of the orcs who had fled Draenor surrendered immediately to the Alliance in the Blasted Lands. They were carted off to the internment camps that had sprung up around Lordaeron. Among the Alliance nations, debate still raged on what to do with the prisoners. Yet most of the Alliance's attention was not on the orcs but on the Dark Portal. Some of their greatest leaders and heroes had not returned from their expedition. Accounts from the few Sons of Lothar who had come back painted a grim picture, but there was still hope that one day Turalyon, Khadgar, Alleria, Kurdran, Danath, and their followers might return. As the days, weeks, months, and years began to pass, that hope faded. The missing soldiers were presumed dead. Statues of the expedition's leaders were erected at the gates of Stormwind City, so that all citizens would receive a daily reminder of those who had made the ultimate sacrifice in order to save their world. Plaques were fixed to the statues, bearing messages from the leaders' friends, comrades, and loved ones. It would be decades before Azeroth would learn the truth of what had happened. In the meantime, the peoples of the Eastern Kingdoms settled into their new lives. The First and Second Wars had far-reaching repercussions, altering the balance of power across the land. The Council of Tirisfal was no more, and the concept of a single Guardian imbued with great power was abandoned. Azeroth now had new protectors. The most prominent was the Alliance. Even though the Horde had been defeated, the Alliance's members saw no purpose in disbanding the faction. They would maintain their ties, sharing resources and military strength to protect the world. The paladins of the Silver Hand also dedicated themselves to safeguarding the land. Only Turalyon had journeyed to Draenor; he had told his comrades to stay behind. The paladins soon trained new holy warriors in their ways, and the ranks of their righteous order swelled. Elsewhere, the Kirin Tor of Dalaran studied the imprisoned orcs and their magics. The magi knew that elements of the Horde were still lurking throughout the Eastern Kingdoms. They wanted to learn as much as they could about their enemy in the event that another war broke out. Just as on primordial Draenor, just as on countless worlds throughout the cosmos, conflict had changed Azeroth and its peoples forever. Yet there was more turmoil to come. In the years ahead, Azeroth would need the Alliance and other protectors to survive

